finally abua begins to
stir and I stand up at the foot of his
bed I put my hands on my hips and I'm
looking at him and he's like tied down
and he opens just one eye of course he
only had one eye right he opens his eye
and he doesn't look at me yeah he looks
at
SpongeBob and his pulse goes from 120 to
220 like in a second and the Machine
starts
going and then you hear hold blue code
blue
and these people rush in he saw
SpongeBob he knew it was up he was like
oh my God the Americans have
me what's up guys if you haven't already
please smash that subscribe button and
hit that like button on the video and if
you don't have time to watch this
episode right now I'd really appreciate
it if you saved it to your watch later
playlist on YouTube finally if you'd
like to follow me on Instagram or X
those links are in my description
below all right so John you and I left
off in the last part the conversation
with you going to Greece after you got
basically in through the through the
school you were put through eight years
into your career to become a clandestine
spy at this point we got to talk all
about 911 and the aftermath of that and
everything you did and what went on in
your career but going to Greece it's
it's very fascinating to me when you did
because this is this is before you know
America's like into the whole Al-Qaeda
thing you guys at CIA obviously knew
damn well what it was but the average
citizen had no idea it was not a big
deal and so the terrorism that people
were worried about at the time was I
think to quote George tennet like you
know blow up buildings by Day drink
champagne by night and it was like
Eastern European type things so that's
pretty much what you were put in the
middle of right yeah it was it was very
much
eurocommunism right Greece had two
primary terrorist groups that we were
working against revolutionary
organization 17 November which was very
Le
and another group called revolutionary
popular struggle that mostly targeted
Greek cops and some Greek military
people mostly the cops um but I mean
every Western European country had had
groups like this you know we're talking
about red brigades and Red Army faction
and and B minoff and oxion direct and
everybody was worried about these the
the provisional Irish Republican
Army most of those groups
were cracked right and broken by the
late
1990s in Greece they were just raging
onward and you know they had killed the
CIA station Chief they had killed two US
defense attaches they had shot Eng
Gravely wounded the DEA representative
they shot and killed a an Air Force tech
sergeant Ronald Stewart um they killed
the Turkish Ambassador the Turkish
Deputy Ambassador they fired a rocket at
the German ambassador the French
Ambassador and then they killed a slew
of senior Greek political figures the
minister of of communications who also
happened to be the prime minister's
son-in-law the governor of the Central
Bank the minister of finance a number of
of Greek
Publishers so this was a group that you
know every time it would kill it would
become more mysterious to the point
where they could carry out an
assassination in bumper-to-bumper
traffic
in rush hour and nobody saw a thing whoa
because people were so
afraid that you know is this is this
group the
government is it the Greek Orthodox
Church which I also heard more than once
of course it wasn't it turns out three
of the Assassins happened to be the sons
of a priest from up North uh but it
wasn't the Greek Orthodox church but it
was so mysterious in Greek they used to
call it the
organization because they would just
disappear after carrying out their hits
so this was a real challenge now when
you're sent there you had said you're
sent there under like a diplomatic Alias
meaning like you're working for the
state department or whatever but are you
immediately made like are you reporting
to other spies on the ground or do you
have like cart blanch to set your own
missions like what was it it was all
very uh formal so I was part of an
entire branch that was working
counterterrorism issues and you know
mostly it was it was Greek terrorism and
we we worked that issue with the Greek
national police and the Greek
intelligence service but there were Arab
issues that you nobody else spoke Arabic
in in you know among my colleagues and
so I had to handle that too and we're
talking about you know popular front for
the liberation of Palestine uh pfl PGC
General command Democrat front for the
liberation of Palestine Abu nidal the
libyans it was a whole slew of of Arabs
that I had to think about besides just
the Greeks you know out there trying to
kill me every day and so they were taken
up they're they're essentially like all
over Europe but they had a major Hub in
Greece the Arabs yeah you know there was
a there was a semi secret deal that was
negotiated between various Arab groups
and the Greek government in the 1980s
that if they um if they didn't kill
Greeks they could Transit Athens
unmolested H yeah which caused us no end
of problems yeah I can imagine so were
you getting read in at the T I mean
obviously you're focused on Greece but
you have a presence of an Arab terrorism
presence there as well so you're focused
on that were you getting read in on like
a lot of the things that were happening
with Al-Qaeda at the time time cuz it's
not like they weren't active like they
were doing things they were very active
blowing up American embassies attacking
the USS Cole right I knew almost nothing
about Al-Qaeda when I returned from
Athens in the summer of 2000 I was in
Bahrain when um when the OPM sang
bombing took place and that was the
first the first anti-American attack
that we were able to attribute to
Al-Qaeda uh but the the name of this
group meant nothing to anybody in Arabic
it means the base right which we didn't
even understand what what the heck is
that supposed to mean and we knew all
about Osama Bin Laden a colleague of
mine wrote a paper in
1991 saying Osama Bin Laden was the most
dangerous man in Saudi Arabia and I was
like who is this guy I never heard of
this guy he was just in the early
planning stages in 1991 hadn't even gone
to Sudan yet and so um Al-Qaeda never
even popped up on my screen when I was
in Athens every once in a while there'd
be somebody in transit um mostly
Egyptian Islamic Jihad because Cairo was
only a one- hour flight from Athens and
so these guys would leave Cairo arrive
in Athens usually just stay in the
transit lounge and then fly out to
wherever it is they were going to go so
we would get we would get a warning from
you know somebody whether it was a
foreign government
or you know um NSA or whomever that so
and so was you know was going to arrive
in Athens and we would either go out
there or we would ask the Greeks to go
out to the airport and just you know get
eyes on the guy until he got on the next
plane yeah but while you were in Athens
like you had some dangerous things
happen as well like you were almost
killed like how did how did that go down
wow it was it was toward the end of my
of my uh my my uh stay in Athens my
assignment and um you know I 90% of my
time was spent working against 17
November we were very provocative
against 17 November we were actively
running Ops against them and then they
would you know shoot a rocket at the
German ambassador or you know do
whatever it is they were going to do and
um because Athens was so dangerous at
the time we actually spent more money on
security in Athens than any other
Embassy in the world wow yeah it was
rated critical threat for
counterterrorism that's how dangerous it
was we spent wild we spent more in
Athens than we spent in
Beirut that's how bad it was so we also
all drove armored cars and I was heavily
armed the whole time I was there I had a
38 on my ankle and 9mm on my on my waist
three extra magazines in a tear away
fanny pack and I had a knife in my back
pocket that it God forbid it came to
that I was going to go down with a fight
were you good with a knife uh not really
no I would usually cut myself it's one
of those things so I had to make the gun
work yeah so um I was driving an armored
BMW 540 it was Branch spanking new and
it was the it was the very first 540 in
Greece we couldn't even insure it we had
to insure it through a company in
Germany uh because the Greeks couldn't
like compare it to anything uh to ensure
it and um I had a new neighbor move in
our our
backyards uh touched each other
diagonally right so he was behind my
house and over one he was the new
British defense atache Brigadier General
Steven Saunders and Steven was a great
guy Life of the Party everybody loved
the guy and we were at a dinner party
one night and he was he was making fun
of me uh but in a friendly way a joking
way and he was saying you Americans
you're so paranoid about security he
goes this is an EU country it's a NATO
country what are you so afraid of with
your armored cars and your weapons and I
a death yeah I said you Brits live in a
dream world if you think because they
have pretty beaches and palm trees that
they're not going to kill you if they
have the chance if they have the chance
they're going to kill you well a couple
of weeks later I I accidentally slept
through my alarm and I never ever did
that now in a in a critical threat for
terrorism post you can't set a pattern
so I left my house every day at a
different time and I took a different
route to work every single day and
sometimes that would mean it took me 30
minutes sometimes it would mean it took
me two hours to get to the office was
that like second nature being able to do
that or was there a lot of planning and
I did that because I was paranoid I did
that for several years after I left the
agency just out of force of habit just
to make sure I'm not being
followed and you'd be surprised how many
times I actually caught these morons at
the FBI later on who think they're so
slick and such good surveillance anyway
that's a different story so
um I slept through my alarm and I was
like oh my God I got to just get on the
main road and go straight to the Embassy
so my my house I was in a in a Northern
suburb of Athens called
giia
and the embassy was on the same
Boulevard gifs Boulevard which changes
names uh when it gets into the city but
it's literally a straight shot exactly
10 miles from four blocks from my house
straight to the Embassy right the
problem is this is a major
thoroughfare right six Lanes plus two
lanes of of uh yeah that's it we got it
on the M plus two lanes of local Lanes
on the sides right so you're talking
about 10 lanes and they're Jersey
barriers so once you're on that's it
you're committed you can't get off so
I'm normally driving in this you know
nonsensical way to get to the uh to get
to the Embassy and there's the embassy
right there Embassy the United States
so I said I I just got to get onas which
I would never do because there are so
many cars you can't tell if you're being
followed and I'm worried about somebody
driving up alongside of me which they
normally did and then they shoot you
with an anti-tank round oh so because it
goes through
armor that's what I was so worried about
so I get on and I'm like oh my God it is
a parking
lot like Cairo kind of traffic
jam but again I'm committed there are
Jersey barriers so I did another thing
that I never normally did I put on the
radio I never put on the radio because I
didn't want to be distracted you know
you start whistling a song or whatever
you don't notice they're coming up
alongside of you with their anti-tank uh
gun and then you're done so I put on the
radio and they break into the the
programming and this guy says avoid kefs
Boulevard yeah because there's a traffic
incident at filo well filo is the
halfway point to the Embassy and I was
like [__] how long am I going to be
stuck in this that's five miles of
traffic 20 minutes pass and the guy
comes on he says avoid gias because
there's a criminal incident at filo and
I was like oo I never heard that before
what kind of criminal
incident so I'm inching my way down the
mountain and then he says avoid GS
Boulevard there was a terrorist incident
at
filo and when he said it I could see
down the
hill
that the left two lanes were closed
there was a white car in the left lane
and they had put police tape around it
and I was like what the heck is that so
I'm getting closer to it and I see the
license plate and it was why it started
with the letters
ybh well because Athens was so dangerous
we couldn't have diplomatic license
plates right and the Greeks in their
Infinite Wisdom gave everybody in the
American Embassy license plates that
began with
yhb and I said oh my God they they
killed some poor Greek y thinking that
it was us cuz yhb ybh and then I said no
wait a minute the British Embassy is ybh
and Steven Saunders drives a white
r so I called the station and I said hey
I think Steven Saunders was just
assassinated he said what are you seeing
I said I'm on key CS I'm looking at his
car I'm sure it's his car there's blood
everywhere and the driver's side window
is shot
out so he calls the British Embassy and
this woman says oh I'm sorry Steven's
not in yet oh and he's like no
listen we think he's been shot they're
like oh my God they start calling the
hospitals he's at the armed uh armed
he's at the Red Cross hospital and he
died 45 minutes later so he's stuck in
traffic they drive right up alongside
him they shoot him with this anti-tank
round it blows his right hand completely
off and then with the window shattered
driving a non-armed car they shoot him
three times in the chest with the same
45 that they used in all of their
assassinations between
1975 and 2002 the wel 45 this is the guy
who the week before is telling you what
are you worried about he was laughing at
me and I laughed at him and I was like
you're nuts man I'd rather be in my
armored car than in your Rinky Dink
piece of junk oh my God and we laughed
we
laughed his wife wife was what turned
this whole thing around because she
immediately went on Greek television and
she said this was not an attack against
Steven it was not an attack against the
British Embassy this was an attack
against the Greek people this
organization is not a political
organization nor is it a phantom group
it's a gang of criminals and they're
committing crimes against the Greek
State and for the first time since 197
public opinion began to change wow yeah
he had two little girls at home and it
was just that's horrible it was just
awful but anyway what 17 November
normally did was they would drop a
Manifesto um at uh at the site of the
hit they didn't drop the manifesto this
time rarely they would they would mail
the manifesto to one of the leftist
newspapers or they would put it in a
trash can and then call a leftist
newspaper and tell them where they could
go get it this time they let several
month mons pass Steven was killed in
April I think it was April 22nd I think
um 99 n uh 2000 okay and
so um August of 2000 I go into the
office and my boss comes in and he goes
did you see the manifesto I said oh no I
didn't I didn't know that they had
Senate and he said they're talking about
you I said about me
I said ' no no no no no I take my safety
very very SEC uh seriously he said dude
they talk about you they
say we saw the big spy but he was
driving an armored car and we knew he
was armed and so we elected to carry out
the Revolutionary sentence against the
war criminal Saunders on the same road
oh my God all we could conclude was that
he was Steven was on TV all the time new
British defense atache he's a general he
had come from Ireland and then he was in
Yugoslavia and he's at every party and
he's meeting with the Minister of
Defense so he's on TV all the time so he
was easy to find and we think that while
they were watching him they saw my plate
and said ooh yhb that's the American
Embassy and then they noticed that my
car was
armored and that's how I came to their
attention so my boss saysyou got to go I
go where he said home like right now I
said but my my kids are at school I
can't go now he said we'll pick up your
kids in an armored car call your wife
we're going to send another car for her
I go wait I can't just leave now I I got
a whole house he said we'll pack up your
[__] just get in a car and go to the
airport so I went to the airport they
brought my wife and kids to the airport
we were on the 12:00 Delta flight back
to New York and never went back I went
back two years later when things had
settled quieted down a little bit but
that was a close one I had a closer one
a year later but that was that was the
first what was the closer one a year
later where was that that was in a
Middle Eastern country that the CIA
won't allow me to name pre 911 yes pre
911 weeks pre 911 so I had a body who
was a station Chief there and we just
really really loved each other just an
allaround good guy and actually he's the
one who introduced me to my second wife
H and um he calls me he said buddy I got
a I got a favor to ask I said sure name
it he goes we're running a double agent
case out here and the guy is just too
dangerous for my people to meet with on
a regular
basis he insists on speaking to the
Chief and I just can't risk meeting with
him can you come out here and pretend to
be me and handle a double agent I had
never handled a double agent before but
I had gone through the training and I
said
done so I got on the plane fly to the
Middle
East and he says here's the story um we
recruited this
guy and he was a an engineer and a
contractor for a major
American defense
contractor the contractor did not know
that he had also been recruited by one
of America's greatest
enemies and they had directed him to
allow himself to be recruited by the CIA
so that he could report back to them as
a double
agent oh this is getting deep so he
didn't know that we knew that he was a
double agent so he was double double
agent huh it gets complicated yeah so I
go out there and I trigger the
meeting and we meet at this obscure
hotel
in and I'm wearing a jacket do we have
to bleep that [__] yes yeah make a mark
of that sorry yeah let's bleep that he
said it yeah we we can't forget that
we'll put the thank you never forget
that yeah we got you we got you you
wouldn't have known no you're good
you're good I I spoke right through it
that's that's why we do it so you meet
with this guy in an undisclosed location
meet at an at an undisclosed
hotel and uh I was wearing a jacket I
took off my jacket so he could see I was
not armed and I said listen since this
is our first meeting we need to talk
about some of the
basics I said the first thing we're
going to do every time we see each other
is something that we call the mad minute
at the CIA so I ask you are you safe
were you followed
here did you do a surveillance detection
route and we make plans for the next
meeting so if somebody bust down the
door we've at least gotten them the
important stuff out of the way he said
well what happens if it they do bust
down the door I said we have to have a
cover story we can say we went to the
same University let's do that okay where
did you go to school he said whatever
school he went to and I said okay that's
where I went to and I came oh [__] sry
sorry it's all good clip it we got it
again so I I came to this country and
uh just make sure on those Lessie just
flip the camera to me in the post edit
when he's saying it and and he'll bleep
it out we're good I'm Sor it it happens
all the time with you with you spooky
guys yeah sorry so I came to this
country we ran into each other we
decided to hang out that's it okay
that's our cover
story and I said next thing we we have
to do is I want you to go out and get a
post office box so if there's some
reason why we can't speak on the phone
I'll be able to message you through the
post office box and I want you to go
there and check for mail once a week he
said okay we'll do so we made plans for
our next meeting and I said to him
most importantly you need to do a
surveillance detection route to our
meeting and home from our meeting do you
know what a surveillance detection route
is he says I think so I said okay here's
what we're going to do I want you to go
from let's say your house to point a and
at Point a let's say you pick up your
dry cleaning and then you go to the
second stop and you buy a light bulb and
then you go to the third stop and you
buy some pap histories and you make sure
you're not being followed and then you
can come to the meeting but once you
finish the second stop get off the main
roads and then use lesser used roads and
then from the final stop to the
hotel just take some crazy way that
doesn't make any sense he said
great so he said to me just so I can be
sure so you're the chief and I said I'm
the chief he said nobody higher than you
I said you got the boss Duke I'm the
chief so I said I'm going to give you my
phone number I had what back then and
we're talking about you know 23 24 years
ago 23 years ago it was called a triband
cell phone so it was good in every
country in the world we bought it in
that country and it acted as a satellite
phone so he would call a local number
and it would ring no matter where I was
in the world which was not a novelty
back
then but he wouldn't have any idea if I
was in that country or if I was you know
somewhere else got it so I pretended to
live there and
um what name did you give him you have
like a fake name oh yeah you always use
a fake name yeah um I actually used my
colleague's real name because remember I
was supposed to be him and he's on the
and he used his real name and he was on
the Diplomatic list oh okay yeah got
it so this went on for months I would
meet him I would meet him every few
weeks we would always meet at different
hotels different locations and I would
get a little deeper and deeper and
deeper in my conversations with him what
kinds of things were you trying to get
from him without going into classified
details
um he was a member of a minority sect
and he had friends and relatives who
were active members of a terrorist group
that that that sect kind of aderes to
and so I wanted that got it
so so he would never ever ever do
surveillance detection routes he would
get in his car drive directly from his
house to the hotel and we have like four
teams of guys on him and he would never
see any of them and then he would leave
are meeting and go directly to this
enemy country's Embassy directly without
stopping no turns no surveillance
nothing and we got teams on him on top
of that we're on his phone because I
said let's exchange phone numbers okay
so now we have his phone too
yeah so this went on for about six
months and
um I happen to be in Washington
and I get this hair on fire cable from
the embassy from from my colleague and
he says they're on to
you and I said how he said well actually
it's my fault he said they're they're on
to me he said they were in the hotel
lobby last time and they got a picture
of you and they said we know who the
chief is and that ain't
him I said okay so we we take it
somewhere else we take it to a
neighboring country the next meeting he
said no dude they've ordered him to kill
you in the next
meeting I said get the [__] out of here
I said this guy's afraid of his own
shadow he's not going to kill me in the
next
meeting you sound like that guy in in
Greece now seriously they never shoot
through my armor car so I'm at
headquarters and they're like
operation's over I said wait a minute
wait a minute let's not be Hasty
here you you send me back in godamn it
we can seriously disrupt this group like
seriously dismantle it so I said hear me
out there's a Marriott in this country
okay every Marriott is designed in
exactly the same way as soon as you walk
in the bathroom's on the
right right really soon as walk into
your room yeah soon as you walk into the
room the bathroom's on the right
interesting I said how about this
we tell them that the meeting is at a
Marriott we get adjoining rooms our
foreign intelligence liaison comrades
and our guys are in the neighboring room
I'll prop the door open with the that
security lock y tell them where to come
in what room I'm in for the meeting when
he comes
in I take him down cuz I'm going to be
in the bathroom I come right out of the
bathroom take him down you guys bust in
from the next uh door the next room and
we got
him they're like I don't know it's risky
I said I I'll wear a vest how about that
under my under my shirt I'll wear a vest
okay they agreed to
it
so it
got it got
unfriendly so I go out there and we have
like six guys in the lobby
well the bad guys have six guys in the
lobby oh [__] and our guys are looking
at their guys everybody's armed they all
know too they all know like this is the
day that they kill me so I'm up in the
room and my guy's calling me saying you
wouldn't [__] believe what the lobby
is like right
now he got a gun yep he got a gun yeah
everybody got gun so do we so they text
me he's coming in right now so he The
Source calls me do you have Chlor form
no no I'm getting there I'm getting
there
okay no we had Demerol injectable yeah
it works so
um he calls me he said I I'm here I'm in
the lobby I said uh come up to the uh
come up to the eighth floor so he comes
up to the eighth floor and I'm there in
the elevator Lobby and I give him this
big bear hug and I Pat him down down and
he's nervous really nervous and I said
come come with me come on we're going to
we're going to walk we're going to go to
the stairwell so we go to the stairwell
well the eighth floor was the top floor
and I go uh we're going to meet on the
roof today he's like what I said we're
going to meet on the
roof no I'm not going to go on the roof
I said sure you are come on let's go
we're going to go up the
roof he's like no I go
yeah up
[Laughter]
he gets nervous to the point where I
think he's going to start
crying and I said what's going
on I thought we're friends I'm not going
to the roof he says and I said oh yes
you
are so I push him to go upstairs and he
starts to
cry I said what is your problem he said
I don't want to go to the
roof I said all right he thought you
were going to see if he could fly MH
that's exactly what he
thought so I said all
right go to the fourth floor and call me
from there he goes down to the fourth
floor I go back to the room which is on
six and he calls me he said I'm on the
fourth floor I said come to 612 so he
takes the elevator comes to 612 knocks
on the door I say come in he walks in I
come out of the bathroom I bare hug him
I take him down the ground our guys and
the and the liaison guys bust in from
the other side and I'm sitting on him I
have him
pinned and I said to him do you think I
am so [__] stupid that I don't know
that you came here to kill me today do
you think I am such a [__]
amateur that I don't know exactly who
you are and what you came here today to
do
he goes [__] you like that he goes [__]
you I'm not afraid of you I said no but
you're going to be plenty afraid of my
friends uh huh and then bang they give
him the the demall he's out well listen
one of the dirty little secrets of the
hotel industry is that people die in
hotels every single day M right so we
put them on a gurnie we cover him up we
take him out the back door into an
ambulance and drive away
in the meantime right to Guantanamo
no no he probably wished he was in
Guantanamo after what he got
yeah I'm getting text messages from uh
from my buddies in the lobby like these
guys are starting to freak out and
they're speaking in their language like
where is he he should it should have
been done by now why hasn't he checked
in what's going on they're saying that
blatantly even though they know your six
guys are there in their in their
language so they don't think think our
guys speak their unusual language the
chances that one out of six come on
stupid stupid idiots Amateur hour yeah
we take him to the intelligence Service
headquarters and when he wakes up he's
tied to a chair oh so I'm standing there
and I said
buddy this can be easy or it can be
terrible you hit him with the abuu beta
line mhm I said where are the weapons
[__] you I'm never tell you anything I
said if you want to live you're going to
tell me where the weapons are I'm not
talking our colleagues beat the living
snot out of him and he just would not
talk so I said or one of the liaison
guys said we need to get into his house
and I said okay I know where he lives
but he's got a Filipino maid and she
never leaves the house and they're like
oh then we can't go in the house cuz
this has to be totally
secret so I
said well let's just say there's a we'll
say there's a gas leak and we'll we'll
evacuate everybody and he's like we
don't have gas lines in this country we
use
propane I go okay well then let's just
bring a big 18wheeler full of propane
and and we'll spill it on the ground and
we'll declare an environmental disaster
and so an hour later there's this
18wheeler driving down the road
and we pull in front of his house
there's this big wheel on the back and
I'm going like this and this propane
spilling all over the ground and we're
like oh it's an environmental emergency
and we closed the propane and then um we
evacuate it was like six houses on a
culde-sac we evacuate all the six
houses so we go into his house he's got
a safe a big safe in the house I was
like this is it it's the weapons so we
have a locks and pick team on standby so
they come 20 minutes or so it takes them
to uh to finally pop the lock and it's
empty except for a map there's a map and
it's got an X like the weapons are here
x I'm serious it was nuts were you
looking for biological weapons no just
weapons weapons okay so it's about
25 miles south of where we were and it
was out in the desert
so we we go down there
and and there's a bunker just dug you
know in the
ground and all of the weapons are in
there like enough for a small army whoa
so we confiscated him our partners
destroyed them he was uh convicted of of
U terrorism and given a life
sentence and uh our enemies were none
the
wiser whoa yeah and then I flew back and
I've never been back to that country
again and this is in the weeks leading
up to 911 yeah this was like three weeks
before 911 like that's wow so I got a
nice award for that operation that
worked out well I'll bet yeah yeah you
were on your game for that one I
was you had said though in Greece you
weren't being read in on any Al-Qaeda
stuff or whatever not a word but when
you got back from Greece when they sent
you home from there you were at langly
right okay and I'm like what is this
Al-Qaeda everybody's talking about now
they start telling you all about it yeah
yeah and
and I remember there was some there was
some terrorist attack I don't remember
which one it was but I was like
Kenya I it may have been it was in that
period between the summer of 2000 and
the summer of 2001 and I was like oh
this is what everybody's been so worried
about like yeah this is
bad yeah but then I just continued to do
Greek stuff until the [__] hit the fan
oh you were yeah but how'd you end up in
the Middle Eastern country as a favor of
my buddy who was the station Chief
that's it you weren't actually now he's
like ah you know kiraku would be good
for this I can trust him to do this
right MH okay and it was that whole you
know good cop thing again
yeah so that's a few week before 911 you
come back to the US after that yeah I
came back to the US and where were you
on 911 I was at headquarters you know it
sounds quaint now but the uh the
government uh printing office GPO
they're up on Capitol Hill the
government printing office was
publishing a compendium of Declassified
cables and it was called Foreign
Relations of the United States Athens
anara Istanbul Nicosia 1947 to 1969 I
still remember it the problem is there
were three cables among the thousands of
cables in that Giant
volume that outed three agency sources
who were still
alive so we asked gopo to stop printing
and they were like nope act of Congress
got a print
so I called the White House and I said I
need an appointment with condalisa rice
this is on 911 on the morning of 911 oh
my God we had a we got an appointment
with condalisa rice at 9 o00 that day so
I went over to kofer Black's office
because tell people who kofer Black is
kofer Black was the chief of the cia's
counterterrorism center con Connie rice
didn't know me from anywhere but she and
kofer were you know long time colleagues
he had met with her we'll get into this
he had met with her a bunch before 911
telling her it was going to happen guys
if you're still watching this video and
you haven't yet hit that subscribe
button please take two seconds and go
hit it right now thank you so I get a
call from the driver saying the car is
ready to take us to the White House and
um we were just going to ask cona rice
to just please don't publish these three
cables right just take the cables out or
black out the names or whatever just
don't publish these because then we're
going to have to offer these guys a
million bucks each or relocate them to
the states and they're all like 90 years
old by now so we didn't want to do that
so um I go over to kof's office to tell
him that the car's ready and his
secretary has a TV a little TV on our
desk now back then we couldn't watch TV
on our computers yeah right and one of
the World Trade Center towers is on fire
and I said I go what happened to the
World Trade Center and she said a plane
flew into it and me cuz I'm an idiot it
I said you know what that happened once
before it did Empire State in the 30s
the Empire State Building was hit by a
plane but it was really foggy and rainy
that day it's so Crystal Clear today
like how can you not see that you're
flying into the World Trade Center and
just as the words came out of my mouth
the second plane hits where's kofer in
the office he's in his office oblivious
to any of this he does even know this is
happening no so she turns to me and she
says did you see that or did I imagine
it
and I said 'we're under attack and I ran
back to my office I saidu two two planes
just hit both towers of the World Trade
Center I think we're under attack so
they ran back up to cofer's office now
you have to imagine this absolutely
enormous office that H has about
150 um uh what do you call it cubicles
yeah in what we call the bullpen and
then around the perimeter of the office
are all the private offices so You' got
the director of the counterterrorism
center the deputy director for
operations the deputy director for
intelligence the deputy director for
military and then the division Chiefs
eerily similar to how wall Street's set
up I believe that
yeah so everybody's gathered there there
were TVs above cofer's uh uh office on a
bunch of different
networks BBC the Russians the French you
know MSNBC CNN Fox I think Fox was
around back then yeah Fox and CNN were
around yeah
mhm and it's just
silence so imagine there 200 people
standing there and then somebody shouts
will somebody please
lead and it was like someone had slapped
Cofer in the face and he's like ah you
go to the director's office tell him
this you go to security you go to
operations and starts barking out orders
so the rest of us are standing there
like what do we do and then someone
said everybody I think we should assume
that we're probably a
Target it hadn't occurred to anybody
there's there there are still two planes
in the air yeah
right then the Pentagon gets hit well we
all had friends at the Pentagon close
friends colleagues it's like well now
what the next one's either for us or
it's for the White House abua later said
he kept saying saying the White House
but pointing to a picture of the capital
building M and he kept saying that that
the White House was we were going to hit
the white house because it was the
Bastion of the Jews and he kept pointing
to the capital
Dome so
um I know godam so um a security guy
come came in and he shouted everybody
evacuate and nobody budged kofer said I
guess we'll just have to die yeah so he
came back in an hour two later and he
says if you don't evacuate you'll be
arrested and CER said everybody just go
just go get out well I mean there
are I it's I can't say the number of
people but there were more than 10,000
people in headquarters right that day at
any given time yeah 10,000 people all
leaving the parking lot at the same time
yeah took me three hours to get
out it was so bad I had to abandon my
car on the George Washington Parkway and
walk the rest of the way to my house my
apartment my then girlfriend who became
my wife met me at my place my place was
closer than hers had she been at
headquarters too she was at headquarters
too and she's like what are you going to
do they're telling us to uh to evacuate
and I said nobody's moving and if I'm
not going to evacuate we have work to do
now and she's like they're telling us we
have to go I'll meet you at your place
and I said okay so we met at my place we
we went to the roof we watched the
Pentagon burn for a while
and then um I said this is ridiculous we
should give blood we should try to give
blood somewhere so we went to a couple
of different there were blood mobiles
set up but the lines were so long they
said it's going to take us 24 hours to
get through these people and I told her
listen take my keys I'm going to walk
back to headquarters and so how far is
that it's about seven miles so my car
was like 4 miles away I walked back to
my car I drove across the median it was
still there oh yeah it was still there
it was chaos yeah and I'll tell you I
after I baned my car surpris it wasn't
looted oh no no everybody was nuts they
were just trying to get out there were a
lot of cars that were abandoned a lot
and so I knew it was bad when after I
baned my car I I got to the um Teddy
Roosevelt bridge and I saw the White
House's um director for Middle Eastern
Affairs walking with no shoes like to
evacu I was like are you kidding me it's
that bad the White House evacuated like
how can that be they've got underground
buers should shouldn't evacuated yeah
they have underground bunkers so I I
walked back to my car I went back to
headquarters and I didn't leave for 4
days I just slept underneath the desk
you know balled up my jacket and used
that as a pillow and I I say in my first
book too it it got so bad
where you know after after lunch it's
like whatever it is 4:00 they lock up
the cafeterias the cafeterias at the
time were were contracted out to
Marriott I forget the name of the
Marriott catering
sub uh Saga was the name of it back then
Saga disgusting food and they would put
a chain and a lock on the cafeteria
doors so we got bolt cutters and we we
cut it open we looted all the food we
turned everything on and we cooked all
the food and we just laid it out on
these folding tables in the hway and
people just grazed for the next 4 days
we ended up cutting a check to the
Marriott to pay for all the food we took
how how many people like you came back
hundreds hundreds hundreds but like not
50% of the agency oh no no not even only
only counterterrorism and Middle East
Ops everybody else bugged out so those
four days take me inside of those what
were you guys doing name
traces every station on the planet was
sending requests for name traces hey
some I just heard a rumor some guy named
Muhammad Abdullah he might be a
terrorist what can you tell me about him
you know I'm being General here but
thousands upon thousands of name Trace
requests and then we started trying to
come up with operations to hit these
guys and you're working 19 20 hour type
days oh yeah yeah now incredible
obviously like there's overload you guys
are in full like game response mode and
everything but in those 4 days are there
any little pockets of I'm talking five
minutes of time in there where you I
don't know you're around the water
cooler with people and you are
processing like talking human to human
about what's happening and not
necessarily just oh did you find this
terrorist or whatever right was there
any of that yeah there was a lot of
crying there was a lot of crying there
were some spontaneous resignations there
was a woman I worked with for years when
I was in the director of intelligence
she was an she was a branch chief in the
counter terorism Center on the analytics
side and she was so panicked when the
first tower hit she got under her desk
and she wouldn't come out from the desk
from under the desk then when the second
tower hit she grabbed her purse and took
off and every single one of her analysts
went to kofer Black a couple days later
and said we don't have confidence in her
leadership sh and she was asked to
resign whoa mhm now what was kofer like
during these days cuz he was one of the
guys who was an architect of what became
the power military response Mission and
obviously was pretty legendary for that
but yeah how much did you have any one
on one time with him at all during this
I did I did multiple times he had to be
pretty pissed he was pissed pissed as an
understatement because he had been
screaming from the rooftops that this
was going to happen yep and nobody would
listen to him and it wasn't just kofer
it was George Tennant and it was Dick
Clark as well Dick Clark was the
counterterrorism Zar at the uh at the
NSC he was a Clinton holdover and the
bush people just kind of sidelined him
and didn't pay any attention to him
they're like ah this gay guy yelling
about terrorism China China is the
threat I remember that coming from the
bush people from the get-go it was about
China like you agency people you're all
obsessed with these semi- literate Arabs
it's China that's going to be our our
problem
and so um kofer I got to say you know I
probably disagree with kofer on 99% of
of issues kofer was a genuine hero in
those days after after 911 a genuine
hero he was he was a he became kind of a
wartime commander and one that you could
respect and follow now the whole
paramilitary thing I think was a grave
mistake really I do really in
Afghanistan the yes why because that's
up to the military they're trained to do
that let the military do what they're
good at doing but the military was
involved with that I know guys who were
involved they were on loan to the CIA
they were CIA run operations for example
ground Branch you know air branch all
those guys even if they're active duty
they're succed to the CIA that's right
that's a mistake why wait wait wait hold
on hold on one second I [__] on pretty
much everything we did as from a
strategy standpoint not our guys who
were over there but from a strategy
standpoint from Suits and Washington DC
in the global war on terror like we
[__] everything up the one thing I've
always cited as an incredible like
modern military Masterpiece which was
run by the CIA in this case was the
paramilitary response in Afghanistan
you're the first guy I've ever heard I
think it was a mistake the the the
mission of the CIA is to recruit spies
to steal secrets and then to analyze
those secrets to make the best informed
policy possible if you're going to do
paramilitary organizations why have the
parah in front of it let the military do
what it's good at doing so you're just
saying you think it was a mistake from a
order of business standpoint exactly
okay all right I'm glad we did it those
guys are awesome I mean you have to have
people like that but you would you would
agree that the the end result of what
they did at the beginning I'm talking
about the beginning stages here people
not were ended up heroic yeah it was
pretty unbelievable what they did
totally unbelievable and absolutely
necessary but don't you think in a time
like that and I want to come back to
actual 911 in a second and some of the
buildup but in a time like that of a
quote unquote unprecedented situation
sometimes like you know the the job
titles are going to have to get blurry
no I would rather these guys answer to
the Joint Chiefs of Staff than answer to
Jose Rodriguez oh I see where this is
going now okay so you you some of the
characters who you think were given
power in that you don't well there's
there's no oversight yeah none zero zero
respect for the
law can can you expand upon that sure
just as an example something that you
and I were talking about offline um you
know you you carry out an illegal
torture program and you videotape it
okay at a secret prison somewhere
overseas the White House gets wind of it
and they say okay what you did was over
and above what we approved it's probably
illegal we may need to Pro prute some of
your people we heard that you taped it
so whatever you do don't destroy the
tapes and then Jose Rodriguez says
destroy the tapes as quickly destroy the
tapes as quickly as you
can hea they are
[Laughter]
tapes I was never holding the water
never you know he came out to Pakistan
when I was there he came with kofer
you're talking about the Godfather of
the black sites by the way just for
people following yes he's the Godfather
of the that's a great way to say it yeah
he came out to Pakistan when I was there
and and so I took them over to AR
liaison Partners to me and this very
very senior level you know we're talking
fourstar generals and um the pakistanis
have this funny it's a very Pakistani
phrase that there was a great hu and cry
right it's like a 1940s 30s era yeah
yeah so they say there was a great human
cry
I am telling you sir there was great
apprehension amongst the people this is
a historical representation of a real
story it's not racist YouTube
Don't and Jose
says there was a
hue and a Cry he's mocking them and
there's they said yes sir great Hue and
cry very
controversial and he's like the Hue I
understand
the
cry this is serious and I was like [__]
you man what's wrong with you you flew
Halfway Around the World to mock these
people who are putting their lives on
the line for us what the [__] wrong
with you of course again my job is to
sit quietly against the wall and take
notes so
afterwards what year is this like 0 this
was January of o02 okay yeah quick
question
I'm not disagreeing with you on this
point with him but again back to I'm
talking the 8 weeks after 9/11 the
paramilitary stuff not the black site
stuff not all that yeah yeah that's a
separate issue MH right like you're
you're to me I maybe I'm misunder
understand this but you're raising the
point of like oh a Jose Rodriguez a guy
like that ended up getting power over in
the Middle East are you saying because
they set the president with that
paramilitary thing at the beginning yes
okay they created a monster without
realizing that they were creating a
moner I see what you're saying I am I
can't even believe I'm going to say this
out loud I was all for I remain all for
targeting uh targeting people who pose a
clear and present danger to the United
States yeah you have to absolutely
that's how we keep our people safe yes
um but there has to be a chain of
command it can't just
be
black and
and not open to oversight or to Legal
Authority right at at the end somebody
has to answer to our elected officials
you know we have we have House and
Senate intelligence oversight committees
for a reason because we made this
mistake in the 40s 50s 60s up to
1975 and you know to me in a lot of ways
we repeated those
mistakes like you give a guy who I
believe is a psychopath Jose Jose who
enjoys killing for the sake of killing
because he thinks that's well that's you
know you need people to do these dark
things in Shadows and no actually you
don't you need to inform the
Congressional oversight committees we're
going to do this operation because it's
going to keep Americans safe you can't
you can't say hey can I do this one
operation and then they say yes you can
do that one operation and then you do 10
times more than that right
and then destroy the evidence and say
yeah what are you going to do about it
what are you going to call the FBI you
going to report me you going to write a
write a strongly worded
memo that's just not the way that's not
the way a civilized society should
work was Jose Rodriguez the least
favorite guy you ever worked for
yeah he was just uniformly unpleasant he
had no sense of humor even his his
peers you know the deputy directors uh
didn't like him he's not a guy you would
want to go out and have a beer with how
did he get to I mean he got high up
obviously how did he get to that point
um a couple of different ways he was
actually quite good in operating in very
difficult
environments uh almost exclusively in
Latin
America and um and his best friend in
the world was ker black oh they were
really tight mhm and you like kofer I
loved kofer I thought he was just great
he did you ever talk to ker about Jose
great leader absolutely not not my
place that's interesting though so they
were really tight you know kofer kind of
was disrespected uh at the end in a in a
disaster like 911 somebody's got to be
the Fall Guy and they decided it's going
to be kofer
why who else is going to be
you know George
tenant had ingratiated himself with the
president so it wasn't going to be
George George was protecting all of his
Deputy directors he had handpicked all
of them um Jose was too low on the totem
pole to take the heat for it had to be
kofer what about Alex station what was
the guy Bill what the hell Miker Mike
Shroyer yeah yeah two
junr and Alex station was saying from
the very beginning they're going to
attack us they're going to attack us why
is nobody paying attention they're going
to attack us I said in my first
book July the 6th 2001 that's right
right July the 6th 2001 they're coming
yeah I am entertaining A group of Middle
Eastern Intelligence Officers we all we
all did this right you have this
delegation come literally every single
day um I had this delegation come from a
a friendly Middle Eastern country all
mid-level guys they're all majors and
Colonels and what you do is you give
them a day of
briefings you take them to lunch in the
director's dining room which hit them
with a with tracking Nano chip right you
implant the Nano chip in their brains
and then you um you have a a photo up
with the
director and then you exchange gifts and
then you take them to a fancy Steakhouse
and you know spend $1,000 on dinner and
then they go back saying what a great
time they had at the CIA and it it's
great for
relations so that day I was entertaining
this group from the Middle East and I
had scheduled a full day of 30 minute
briefings on all these different Global
issues one of them was Al-Qaeda and so I
asked a junior analyst to come in just
give us a 30 minute thing on Al-Qaeda
instead inok kofer and the director of
operations for Alex station I stood up
and I said oh I said gentlemen this is
kofer black he's the director of the
cia's counterterrorism center and this
woman is the director of
operations I I was
shocked kofer s sits down and he says
straight out something terrible is going
to happen we don't know exactly when or
what but it's going to be an attack
that's unprecedented yes he had just
said this to cond I think just said it
yep and he said I beg you if you have
any sources inside Al-Qaeda please help
us and
silence whoa silence they didn't have
any sources in al-Qaeda they were didn't
no they were just nobody did they were
just as shocked by the direct Ness of
this briefing as as I was so at the end
of the day I send these guys back to
their hotel we're going to go out to
dinner at like 7 so I go to Ker's office
to thank him for taking the time and I
said kofer I got to ask you I'm not
working on
Al-Qaeda was that just for their benefit
to sort of shake them up or were you
serious he said oh I was serious
something terrible is going to happen
and then as soon as I saw that second
plane hit I was like oh man this is ex
exactly what he was talking about yeah
this is one of those things you know how
the internet is with 911 and stuff and
it's it's one of the topics that I
always get body bagged on when when I
try to talk about this I take it on the
chin and I give it right back
so there's no doubt to me that evidence
suggests that other intelligence
agencies around the world and I'll leave
it at that had some prior knowledge of
what was going to go down here well
there were there were two we can go
ahead and name go for it yeah the
Israelis and the Saudis up to their
necks oh yeah uhhuh and and both wanted
it to happen for different
reasons I love your directness that's
took the took the words right out of my
brain and put it on the mic there so let
me add something if I may interrupt you
please go ahead you know when we caught
Abu zua in March of o2 which we'll tell
the story of we also confiscated his his
diary and I use the word diary Loosely
he's like writing letters to himself and
[__] right so it was it was an address
book book it was a diary it was a doodle
book but he was writing these letters to
himself as a young man so it's the
27-year-old abua writing to the
14-year-old abua saying don't make the
mistakes that I made treat our father
with respect you know be kind to that
girl next door that you were rude to
that kind of thing the FBI concluded
because they are so wise that they were
the rantings of a
Madman no he just very creative he was
not a mad man yeah um but the important
part of this is in the address book
part there were the names and cell phone
numbers of three Saudi
princes so to make a long story short we
went to the Saudis and we said we're
going to start killing people and some
of them may be named Al saoud if you
don't get on the stick
well within a week all three of them
were were dead one died of 43 of a heart
attack yeah mhm one was killed in a
single car accident on the Riad Jetta
highway right his brakes didn't work
anymore and one died of thirst while
camping in the desert yeah
mhm all right so I bring this up
because it's very well documented that
the CIA and FBI did not share
information because there was strong I
mean you've hinted at that all day you
guys hat each other so John O'Neal Who
was a very Brash flawed guy at FBI
counterterrorism New York if youy
director of the FBI and uh special agent
in charge of the New York field office
right so if you've ever seen the series
The looming Tower or read the book by
Lawrence what the hell is uh Lawrence uh
oh my God that's hard
it's a great book Lawrence Wright that's
it yeah Lawrence Wright classic classic
book excellent book so John all his
flaws aside was spoton about Osama Bin
Laden counting the table about it%
correct Bill Shore at is that his name
Mike Sher Mike Shyer at CIA 100% correct
as well [__] hated him Y and so there
was a lack of sharing there including
guys who the in Intel that CIA had about
guys who were in America going to flight
schools and whatever so it looks it's a
very bad look for CIA and it's deeper
than that even please um the CIA and FBI
computer systems were
incompatible what yeah so if I'm in the
CIA and I write a
cable and it's a finished intelligence
report it goes to the CIA the state
department the Pentagon the White
House it can't go to the FBI because the
FBI computer system is not set up to
accept CIA cables oh my God and when the
FBI writes a cable it can't be sent to
the
CIA that's how much we hated each other
holy [__] that's changed right but this
is what we were dealing with on 91 right
so point being that there's a total
Communication Breakdown there and and
that would you would definitely file
that under the subject matter of like
incompetence when you're looking at
doing a autopsy of what happened
definitely official incompetence okay
when people run just because it I think
it makes them feel good to say online
the CIA did
9911 I have to look at evidence here and
the and the and I say this as someone
who thinks the CIA is done a lot of
awful [__] over the years and we've seen
it publicized for sure and we'll always
call that out absolutely we've talked
about JFK on here we've talked about MK
Ultra but on this one when you see guys
like kofer black and George Tennant who
was there was a meeting on July 6th like
you talked about and there was another
one in August at the White House I want
to say George was at the one in August
but cover black I believe was at both of
them the [__] leaders of the CIA went
to the White House it's on record yes
and said this is going to happen they
didn't necessarily say it's two planes
going into the World Trade Center
another we didn't know the detail but
they knew it was [__] coming and the
issue when you look at it is that it
took the [__] Clinton White House
like six and a half years to start
taking out kind of seriously and here
you had a white house that was certainly
a very flooded White House only eight
months in and they're like yeah we'll
worry about that latery Rice was one of
the worst Defenders she's like you guys
you're obsessed with this Al-Qaeda yeah
yeah yeah so when you see the a the the
20 almost 25 year aftermath Now 23 years
whatever it is MH where over time this
is as you get farther and farther away
from an event you get people who were
maybe young that are now coming of age
who didn't see it happen right now they
look at the evidence you see a lot of a
lot of information float online from all
different sources ranging from Total
morons to you know people who may have
had some security clearances or whatever
and you get this this batch of different
opinions about what the inside job was
and certainly as we discussed there were
there was certainly some inside
information here that was that was not
shared and and it's a very corrupt day
but when you see as someone who has
every reason to also not like the CIA
and maybe some of the power structures
that exist there when you
see so much of the American public pin
it specifically just on the CIA how does
that make you
feel it makes me lament the fact that
there is so much intellectual laziness
in our country
today yeah
um listen the C to to Echo your comment
just now the CIA has done some awful
[__] [__] over the course of its history
from 1947
onward um murdering 3,000 Americans uh
in one day is not one of those things
yeah no we can blame listen Al-Qaeda did
this we can also blame the Saudi
government I believe the Saudi
government were elements elements of the
Saudi government elements of the Saudi
royal family were involved in this up to
their necks the Israelis probably had
advanced warning that this was going to
happen and decided not to tell the
United States because they wanted us to
go to war with the Middle East right it
makes them stronger that's right so they
had a vested interest in the US being
attacked that day but there was no Nano
thermite in the paint there was no
controlled demolition it wasn't the
space aliens or the lizard people which
I've actually been told multiple times
yeah yeah that out of hand man it was
Al-Qaeda yeah but you're there those
next four days because I believe the par
military operations started maybe five
six days later something like that so
you're a part of the planning for that
right no that was happening very very
secretly and it was an
absolutely heroic group of
guys all of whom were were known to us
they just kind of disappeared appeared
one day a couple of days after
9/11 and they were they were air dropped
into um into Northern Afghanistan we
talking ground Branch guys uh
no it was a bunch of middle-aged guys
who knew how to ride horses and shoot
guns um and they weren't all CIA no they
weren't all
CIA um we got a podcast coming up about
that next year just stay tuned a couple
of them have written books
or maybe one of them is WR two of them
have written books uh it remains pretty
highly classified but these guys put
their lives on the
line
to to create that early relationship
between the CIA and the Northern
Alliance that would allow us to
overthrow the Taliban and to force
Al-Qaeda out of the
country what did your after those four
days are up I guess you went home
finally yeah you take a couple days off
or I was going to say like a few hours
in fact in fact nobody took any time off
to the point where Congress had to wave
the Federal
Regulation that you can only
accumulate I forget what it was 2,000
hours of leave or something like that
they took the cap off and they also took
the cap off of
overtime oh my God the overtime it's
like they're bringing youone money in a
wheelbarrow payday I bought a house just
from oh Pakistan man listen Pakistan I'm
I'm making my salary which was it was a
good salary it was enough for me to live
on in DC when did you first go to
Pakistan uh January 6 okay two 2002
January 4th 2002 real quick just before
Pakistan because I want to get there
right now those three months what are
you what are you doing Al Al Al just in
the office at 24 hours a day yeah mhm
any major breakthroughs you were a part
of that you can talk
about there were a couple things I'm
actually pretty proud of okay what were
they I I I probably shouldn't say I'll
say one was domestic which kind of
shocked everybody I was very proud of
that uh and then there were two overseas
that I was proud that no it just never
occurred to anybody that there are Arabs
in some of these places that I probably
shouldn't say I I did well but the but
on a broad level I guess the things
you're referring to are are identifying
people who were terrorists and us being
able to get them and we started looking
at al-qaeda's finances you know you gota
you got to disrupt the finances on top
of it all these people are getting paid
I mean even if it's only $200 a month
how were they paying people it was Osama
bin Laden's personal money yeah but how
are they getting like okay Osama Bin
Laden's sitting in Afghanistan and he's
getting money to some [__] in [__]
Bulgaria a lot a lot of it was um banks
in places like um Sudan or Pakistan a
lot of it was What's called the haala
system do you know what the haala system
is I don't think so oh this is this is a
problem years later when I was the chief
investigator on the Senate Foreign
Relations Committee I I did a study on
the haala system I flew out to the
Middle East and I talked to some um UAE
uh police senior police officials about
the halalas halalas
are informal unofficial money transfer
centers so when I say informal and
unofficial what I did just to test it
was I walked into
a a little grocery store like little
like one guy selling some fruits and
vegetables and I said I want to send
$50 to the United States and he said
where in the United States I said
Washington DC he says okay give me the
15 the $50 I give him my 50 he gives me
a 16-digit
number just written by hand on a piece
of paper and he puts an address of an
Arabic Bakery in Bethesda Maryland and
he says this is where you get your money
whoa so I fly back a week later I take
the subway up to Bethesda I go into this
Arabic Bakery and I I said I need to
talk to somebody about picking up uh
some money and uh I give him my 16-digit
number he looks in this Ledger and he
gives me whatever it was
$46 from my
50 totally completely
untraceable now I I only did $50 just to
see if it would work whoa and it worked
but they're doing you know hundreds of
thousands in a single transaction
they're doing millions and what they the
way they move the money around is by DHL
DHL DHL will still deliver boxes of
money oh like the company DHL DHL FedEx
won't do it you know UPS won't do it DHL
will do
it so I was like we got to shut this
thing down so Osama Bin Laden's just
like DHL and his money around the world
MH whoa that's like it's not hairs on
skin standing up yeah so for 3 months
helping identify all this stuff and then
what had were is this when you were
first approached about enhance
interrogation no that was later that was
later so I went to Pakistan in January
of 02 had wild crazy success there and
um and I went back to headquarters in
late May of o2 and that's when I was
approached okay but the the wild crazy
success was Abu zua yeah and all that
okay so you get into Pakistan what was
your were you like the highest ranked
CIA guy there yeah well in
counterterrorism okay we had a chief and
a deputy chief and they so they're
sending you to Pakistan and
what's what's the objective just like
try to find any hvts we can get any of
them now we're bombing this [__] out of
Tor B at the time we knew that the the
whole Al-Qaeda leadership was in the
village of torab Bora or the Vons of the
village of Tabora in eastern
Afghanistan and um so we're just bombing
them
mercilessly and they're they're crossing
the mountains into Pakistan and looking
for Safe Haven there uh safe houses any
way they can just get away from the
bombing did you guys already believe Bin
Laden had made it into Pakistan at that
time no we thought he was we thought he
was held uh held up in in toror now the
the story is pretty famous uh we had
sencom had a
translator who was in touch with
Al-Qaeda fighters on the
mountain and he said you're surrounded
and we're going to kill everybody unless
you
surrender um which is what general
Franks had instructed him to say
and the
al-Qaeda person he was talking to said
we will surrender at dawn if you let our
women and children come down
and so we stupidly agreed to that so the
women and children come
down we
start uh expecting at dawn for bin Laden
to uh to give up and the rest of the
al-Qaeda leadership to give up in
instead nobody comes down and here
during the night while we're waiting for
the women and children to come down they
dressed as women went down the other
side of the mountain
and escaped including Bin Laden Bin
Laden we later Learned was dressed as a
woman and sat in the back of a pickup
truck and escaped MH he was like 6'4
yeah it's a tall [__] woman you can
say that again big feet and
everything so you you go into Pakistan
take me into like day one there you get
on the ground what are you doing who are
you talking to oh my God day one I
arrive at 4:00 in the morning from
London it's a beautiful country though
it is actually beautiful country their
food is fantastic I gained a lot of
weight there just in Pakistan yeah I
even you know when I went back home I I
even dreamt about Pakistan I I loved the
place it's rough you look you have to
accept the fact they're trying to kill
you and you accept the fact that you're
going to catch some god- awul disease
and if you just accept it just surrender
to it you'll actually enjoy yourself
yeah not on my list of places to go but
maybe I'll reconsider
that's a no that's a don't you [__]
dare so I arrive at 4:00 the driver says
I'll pick you up at 700 to take in I
said oh God please let me sleep till 8
please pick me up at 8 so I go in at 8
go up to the chief the deputy chief Hi
I'm the new guy the chief I knew
actually from the farm where'd you go
like where is this uh the American
Embassy okay you're at the actual
Embassy got and uh they sat me down they
said okay here's what what we want you
to do we want you to come up with a
standard operating procedure for taking
down a terrorist safe house I said all
right now I had never done this
before I had been in my training I had
been trained
to recruit spies to steal secrets to
develop sources of information not to
kick down the door of a safe house and
grab everybody and put them in flexi
cuffs this is new to me so I went back
to my office with a legal pad
and I'm
thinking how do I take down a terrorist
Safe House well number one I would want
it to be dark so I wrote 0200 at the top
of the
paper and I thought I would need stuff
like I need battering rams and guns and
ammunition and night vision goggles and
secure Communications and you know I
made a long list of
stuff I went to to
www.s.com
gs.com it's a Police Supply Warehouse in
Kentucky and I ordered everything I
needed and I put it on my credit card
wait you paid for it sure and then I
just reimbursed myself oh okay yeah that
worked all this [__] came in a giant
crate like a few days
later except the secure coms I got from
headquarters and um
I had an unlimited budget quite
literally it was
unlimited so
uh I figured 911 is still an open
criminal investigation and as much as we
might hate to do it we got to invite the
FBI to be there with
[Music]
us and then you know this is Pakistan so
we probably have to invite the
pakistanis since it's their country yeah
and we're bus down doors in their
country I would be upset if these
Chinese gangs were roving around busting
down the doors of Americans and grabbing
them right but the the pakistanis are
not that their intelligence agency is
historically kind of toofaced
no very much so but that's kind of the
good
part there
are two very distinct factions within
the isi right the one I dealt dealt with
were all trained at Sandhurst the
British uh West Point spoke English
fluently absolutely Fearless would
happily give up their lives for the
mission the other
faction had long
beards walking
aroundd yeah you don't want to deal with
those guys those guys are going to cut
your throat as soon as you turn around
so I'm going to deal with these Good
Guys the other guys I'm just going to
for the time being I'm going to pretend
they don't exist got it right we can
work against them later see you have
your choice yeah so I'm working just
with the counterterrorism guys so I get
a tip with a little address right I call
the pakistanis I go downstairs to the
FBI because they're on a different floor
and I said uh hey I got a tip we got an
address let's hit this place 2 o'clock
we'll see how we do
2:00 we go it's two two CIA two FBI two
isi and then a contingent of local Islam
Abad police who are succed uh by the isi
just to make sure you know we're all
safe so we take this battering ram that
I got from Kentucky bloop we bust the
door down and there are these two kids
in there one's 18 one's 19 and they
start
balling they were from Tunisia M and we
cough on
and one's like can I call my mother I'm
like no you can't call you're under
arrest you can't call your
mother the other one's like
balling and I said to my
colleague this is the Fearsome
Al-Qaeda this is what we're so afraid of
they're [__] children
MH like maybe this is just a
fluke so we took him took him to the RL
pendy jail just locked them
up couple of nights later couple days
later I got a call from a friendly Arab
intelligence officer Brigadier General
and he says hey I heard you're the guy
that we talked to about these the word
got around I said sure sure let's meet
for coffee so we meet for coffee he sort
of pushes a paper across he said uh said
here's an address some bad guys in there
I said okay thank you took the
paper finished my coffee went back to
the to the office I said we have a tip
let's bust this place down tonight so we
put the team together again bust it down
this time was more serious we got a
couple of members of Egyptian Islamic
Jihad which is the group that killed
President anir Sadat oh wow and then
merged with al-Qaeda in 1995 so they
were still their own entity but they're
like a subsidiary kind of exactly okay
so I was like okay this is different
these guys were were bad guys real bad
guys so I'm thinking this is actually
working so every couple of nights we
would bust down the door of some house
grab two three four guys whatever
sometimes we would do two in a night you
worried about waking up the neighborhood
and people finding out Americans are
there people were petrified at the
thought that this is either Al-Qaeda
breaking down the door or it's the
pakistanis breaking down the door and
whoever it is I don't want any part of
it okay
yeah and
then in February of
2002 you know we we work s days a week
right and and usually 14 to 16 hours a
day the weekend in Pakistan is Friday
and Saturday the weekend in the Middle
East is Thursday and Friday but Friday
and Saturday in Pakistan and Saturday
was the only day I allowed myself the
luxury of sleeping until 8 before I had
to get up and go to the
office and um now the phone rings at
like 6 o' I was like damn it can't get
any sleep in this country so it's the
chief and he's like something's up you
got to come in right away so I get
dressed go into the office everybody's
already there but it's the the chief the
deputy chief the chief Ops then the FBI
legal attache his deputy and me I go
what's
up and the chief says we just got word
that Abu zubeda is somewhere in Pakistan
we have to catch him I'm like okay I'm
thinking AB was a beta who the [__] is
that I know that name from somewhere and
then I remembered thank God I had just
read an article in Time Magazine which
was a thing back then that he was the
number three in
al-Qaeda so I said right right the
number three yeah he's somewhere in
Pakistan everybody turns and looks at me
and I go I go guys this country is the
size of Texas it's got 200 million
people in it what do you mean he's
somewhere in Pakistan you have to catch
him like seriously you look at me you're
CT
Ops I was like oh [__] okay let me I'll
think of
something I came up with a couple of
terrible ideas what how so when I was in
college one of my summer jobs my dad was
friends with our state senator so he got
me this patronage job I was a toll
collector on the Pennsylvania
Turnpike and we knew that Ababa was
moving back and forth between theore and
fbad well that's a toll road so I oh so
you did know that oh yeah so but but
lore has 12 million and fbad has 8
million you can't just say there go
catch him there he is right he's in New
York go get him yeah you know so that's
a toll road well it's a toll road like
two-thirds of the way and then it just
stops and then it's just a dirt track
the rest of the way to Fe labad so you
wanted the sunny Corley on him no
no I was more gentle than that no all
right I said I was a toll collector I
know how to operate the toll machines oh
my god so let's put CIA guys in all the
toll booths and when we see him we grab
him they're like no not going to work no
no we're not going to do that I remember
the were like 65,000 cars go through
those boots every day sir we cannot I
was like okay okay it's just an idea
sorry yeah you're good Mark Mark the PA
yeah sorry no you're I won't do that
anymore no no it's fine I just it's it's
ridiculous I got to be that careful on
YouTube but you have no idea the [__]
that they've I'll rephrase it then so it
won't cause you no no no it's all good
we just bleeped it we're good okay we
got it
so you tried the toll booth one you had
another bad idea there was another one
where we were vaguely able to geolocate
his
phone but he would only turn on for 15
30 seconds at a time just to listen to
the voicemails and then he back then you
could take the battery out of the cell
phone so he would just take the battery
out so it would ping and we'd be like
he's in that direction and then the Ping
would stop because it couldn't focus on
it needed more time to focus on the spot
and we needed hours like to get in the
car and follow the Ping and so he had to
be on it for hours for us us to be able
to geolocate him he's only on for at the
most was 30 seconds so it we couldn't
even get out of the
office so finally I said to the chief I
need to bring in a targeting officer now
a targeting officer is an analyst but
vastly different kind of analyst than
than what I was in the director of of
intelligence an intelligence analyst is
reading
allsource uh intelligence and writing
articles or papers for the president the
vice president the secretaries of state
and defense the national security
adviser a targeting analyst is taking
millions of pieces of data and metadata
for the specific purpose of locating a
Target this is what Andy bus's wife does
that's right she's a targeting analyst
so post 911 this became a critically
important
skill so I had a
friend um who actually trained Andy buam
Manti's wife and I called him and I said
hey can you come out to Pakistan I need
help oh what what's what's going on what
are you looking for I Saidi can't tell
you until you get here and you got to
sign a secrecy agreement
but you're not going to want to miss
this
operation he was on the next flight so
he
arrives and I'm like abuaba is somewhere
here we don't know where we can't find
him and he's like okay so what do you
have I said we got a handful of phone
numbers a handful of of email addresses
and a handful of physical addresses so
he he took this piece of Butcher Block
paper about about the size of the table
maybe a little bit smaller than this
table and he wrote Abu zua in the middle
and circled it and then around that he
wrote all of the the phone numbers and
email addresses that had been in touch
with abuaba and then around that he
wrote all the phone numbers addresses
and email addresses of everybody who had
been in touch with the people who had
been in touch with Abu Zeda he worked on
this for a week or two and there were
lines intersecting going all different
directions it's like straight out of
Homeland yeah it looked like a spiderweb
and at the end of it he said to
me I can't pair it down to anything less
than 14 I said 14 I go dude we never hit
more than two sites before in a night I
can't hit 14 sites in a night there
aren't enough of us he said I I can't I
can't get it any down any lower than 14
so I wrote a cable to headquarters I
said I need 36 guys I
need X millions of dollars in cash we
need weapons night vision goggles lots
of ammunition satellite dish secure coms
everything they chartered a
737 they're like say less yeah and I'm
telling you 24 hours later it
landed and we start offloading the stuff
and we started taking it to a hotel can
you
imagine not really like crates that are
marked arms and we're Wheeling it into
the hotel and this this Pakistani
security guard was like you can't bring
that in here and I was like yeah yeah
[__] we can yeah we're authorized we're
authorized and the British the the the
manager of the hotel was this British
guy and he knew exactly what was going
on and I slipped him a couple of hundred
bucks and I said keep this security
guard out of my way I don't like this
guy's attitude he's like he's
fired cheap date I would have been like
yo peel off some of those racks from the
plane every once in a while he would ask
me if I would sit and have a coffee with
him in the lobby and I would just
because he made sure we were all happy
and had everything we needed well it we
can't run this operation from a
hotel so I went to the Pakistani isi guy
in in lore and he said I've been
instructed to give you anything you need
what do you need I said I need a safe
house and before the safe house I need a
real estate agent a real estate agent so
he's like okay so he gets us a real
estate agent we went and looked at a
bunch of houses and I picked one it was
10 bedrooms and 10 bathrooms in the
fanciest section of the
city and so you just take some cash out
of the trunk and and it to and the guy's
like and he goes sir do you mind if I
ask you what you do for a living don't
worry about it and I go I looked at my
friend and he goes
we're we're textile
Barons and I said yes we are we're
textile Barons and he said that's
wonderful textiles are one of the most
important parts of the Pakistani economy
and we go yes we make lots of clothes
lots welcome to Pakistan sir he says
welcome welcome thank you here's your $5
million in cash so we bought this
house and then we went to faisalabad
which is one of the just most horrible
places on Earth and we bought a second
house seven bedrooms and seven bathrooms
we figured we needed all those bedrooms
to do interrogation
H yeah so that's why I did that so that
was a black sight you know what I never
thought of it that way but I guess in
retrospect you could probably call it
that right see now you're few
fingernails on the floor we were very
kind I never laid a hand on anybody yeah
you were kind they were kind when you
were in the room then you left they're
like there goes the human rights guy
yeah that's
true it's a cross I have to bear so so
uh so you have two houses 14 bedrooms
seven bedrooms you're loaded up one's in
fad and the other one's where lore yeah
okay so
um the analyst remained in uh actually
he drove down to lore with me he helped
carry the money it was too much for one
person to carry so he he drove back to
fisel laad to sort of manage things from
from there and um
you know we had these 36 guys half CIA
half
FBI and
um I gathered everybody along with the
pakistanis I gathered everybody in the
laor safe house and I stood on the the
coffee table and I said guys at the risk
of
sounding melodramatic life is a game of
inches we're gonna have to synchronize
our watches so we synchronized our
watches everybody chuckled and I said so
here's what we're going to do everybody
who's assigned to uh to Feist laad we
chartered a bus and you're going to get
on the bus and go to the safe house
there so I said um it's it's 2200 now at
0130 we had cars we had rented you know
a dozen cars so I said at 0130 get in
your assigned car and go to your
target
0155 be within line of sight of your
target there's 14 targets yeah yeah
three three in lore and 11 in feis labad
and then one in lore we had to cancel
because when we did the the dry run
earlier in the day it turned out to be a
a pay phone in a shishkabob stand so
you're down to 13 down down to
so so 0158 get out of the car and
exactly as the clock strikes 0200 bust
down the door separate the women and
children from the men grab the men and
put him in the Patty
wagon and
so everybody got in the
bus and at 0200 I was on the roof of the
safe house with a colleague of mine and
I looked at my watch and I said 0200
here we go and just as I said the words
we hear this sound it's like dink dink
dink metal on
metal and I said that's not good I
wonder what that is it's 2 o'clock in
the morning listen the whole country of
Pakistan goes to sleep at like midnight
so it is dead silence out there there's
no traffic there's no
nothing we hear this dtin dink
dink so he said to me site 13 is the
closest to us I wonder if it's site
13 and then we hear shots fired and I
was like oh my God so I I got on the
walkie-talkie and I said site 13 come in
what's going on over there and he says
shots fire shots
fired I was like a crap we run
downstairs we jump in our car we speed
over to site 13 it's chaos over
there there are three people laying in
the street one's dead obviously dead and
um one looks like he's either dead or
he's going to be dead in a minute
and I'm going to show you some of the oh
you got pictures of this I got pictures
imagine that got pictures from 23 years
ago of dead guys in the street so
um I'm going to get to see it YouTube
won't sorry guys oh
yeah oh wow these are like real real oh
they're real
real they're
Grizzly whoa yeah what's that what's
that old line they're going to have
they're going to have spiders crawling
across their eyes flies flies that was
ker yeah well they're going to have
flies on their eyes and they did that
they did so um I love that you have this
like
already it was a it was a real [__]
getting him cleared by the CIA those
pictures yeah yeah so um the one guy was
dead the second guy looked like he was
dead or he was going to be dead in a
minute third guy is screaming bloody
murder so I said to the Pakistani I go I
go what's what's happening here and he
says we got him we got your
man and I said which one is he this one
right here one that's alive the guy
that's almost dead maybe
dead this guy didn't look anything like
abuaba we had a six-year-old passport
photo and the passport photo was this
you know goodlooking thin young guy with
a a CL closely cropped beard and
mustache
this guy that's laying in the street
he's fat he's clean shaven crazy I say
it all the time Albert Einstein hair
going all every Wich
way I go that doesn't look anything like
him so I call the analyst and I I told
him what was going
on he's like give me a picture of his
eye so I I kneel down and I shout at him
if the hunic Open Your Eyes he's almost
dead so I lift up his eye but it's
rolled back in his head all I can see is
the whites and I said he's this guy's
dying he's soaked in blood there's blood
all over the road um so he says um give
me a shot of his ear cuz no two people
on earth have the same ears they're like
fingerprints well phones didn't have
cameras in those days so I I take a
picture of his ear I plug the camera
into the phone I going to say it's a
nice camera those were HD shot SCS oh
thank you yeah it was a good camera yeah
so um I send the um I send the picture
to the analyst he sends it to
headquarters five minutes later they
come back back they said it's
him so it turned out the dead guy was a
bomb maker from Syria they were on the
second floor of the safe house there
were 23 guys at the bottom floor and
then they knew that there were VIPs
upstairs they didn't know who it was oh
the guys downstairs didn't know who was
no idea no idea who it was uh and the
VIPs had a t- Walla this kid Pakistani
kid who would go out every day and buy
food and cook the food for the day but
like I say all they knew was that there
were VIPs
upstairs so the Syrian bombmaker was
killed they they climbed to the roof of
the house and they were jumping to the
roof of the next door neighbor's house
to try to escape when the attack went
down and the last [__] thing I said
before we got on the buses was take them
alive right and this Pakistani cop is
like Bang Bang bang with an AK-47
[__] Rambo idiot so they killed him
instantly he was dead before he hit the
ground and you saw the picture he's
clearly dead yeah he's out abua was the
second one to jump and the guy shot him
in the thigh the groin and the stomach H
yeah so he was just about done and then
the third guy was shot in the leg right
through the center of his femur but
we'll get to that in a minute stick a
finger in there it was you could stick a
fist in there did you you do it no you
sure he was screaming without me having
to help okay all right uh but we we had
a we had a conversation about it later
in the evening okay so we throw him in
the back of this filthy pickup truck
Toyota Cherry it was called and we
rushed to FIS laad Hospital the worst
place on Earth I've said in other
podcast that the doors are open it's
it's like 3 3:20 in the morning now the
door are open the windows are open like
swarms of mosquitoes are just feeding on
people's open wounds dogs walking up and
down the hall taking a bite disgusting
yeah um I've said too I said in my first
book there was a bar of Irish Spring
soap and it had a bunch of syringes
sticking out of it so if you needed a
shot they would just pulling out put the
thing give you shot stick it back in the
bar of soap it was bad really bad uh so
here are all these CIA guys dressed as
pakistanis bringing in an Arab who's
bleeding to death and I two of them
right because you got the guy with the
leg too yeah so I said to the doctor
he's like was shocked right and I said
doc you got to patch this guy up my
orders were to take him
Alive Now go so they take him into
emergency
surgery and I sit down down I'm with two
colleagues and two
pakistanis and we just sit down like
this is
exhausting well word got around the
al-Qaeda community that we had gotten
him and so they started driving by the
hospital and just opening fire on the
hospital and we're diving down and I
said to the Pakistani major awesome guy
major
khed I said uh if they realize how
lightly armed we are we're dead can you
get a helicopter in here we need to get
out of here he said I think so 20
minutes later helicopter lands in the
parking lot I I walk into the the uh
surgery the operating room like this I
go doc wrap it up we got to
go I did and they're sewing them clothes
there's the blood everywhere we put him
and and and The Bodyguard that shot
through the leg we put them both on the
helicopter we fly him to a Pakistani
military base about 50 Mi away the the
there was a they called it a hospital it
wasn't a hospital it was like a clinic
uh right on the side of the tarmac it it
was like a it was round it had a Hubb
and spokes so a Red Cross kind of thing
yeah and there was a desk in the center
like a nurses station and then there
were eight Bays around there were like
three Bays that had patients in them and
all were in there for attempted suicides
I saw on the on the board and then they
took r two
prisoners
so they were expecting us of course and
they took abis beta right into surgery
and the doctor came out a few minutes
later and he said look I got to warn you
I have never seen wounds so severe where
the patient lived so you need to be
prepared for him dying I was like damn
it like there was one single order from
headquarters take him
alive well I was
exhausted and so I turned the ceiling
fan on as high as it would go to make me
slightly uncomfortably cold in his room
in his room and I just waited for him to
come out of surgery in the meantime this
[__] guy is screaming bloody murder
in the other bay so I went in there did
you see the picture of him like looking
he's laying and he's looking he's
covered soaked in blood yeah so I go in
there and I said uh keik how are you he
goes
alhamdulillah like that God thanks to
God glory to
God I said yeah you don't look so
good I said in
English and he says are you American and
I said yeah and he goes the
pakistanis they held me down and they
put an AK-47 against my leg and they
shot me I said that's not what I heard I
heard you were jumping from the roof of
the house to the roof of the next house
he stops crying he goes I am 150 kilos I
cannot jump from the roof like that 330
lbs and he was you saw the picture yeah
big guy so I pull back the
sheet and there is a perfectly
round powder
burn all the way around his wound and I
go I don't know anything about that that
happened before I got there yeah not my
jurisdiction yeah I heard you were
jumping from the
roof wow so finally they bring up as AA
out of surgery and again completely and
utterly soaked in blood they're pumping
blood into him with a pump and as
quickly as they're pumping it in it's
just spilling out of him and it's it's
dripping off the bed it made a big pool
under the bed it was like a scene out of
a horror
movie so I sat down at the foot of his
bed and I'm looking at him just staring
at him and I'm thinking you know what I
am so tired I'm afraid I'm going to fall
asleep he's in a coma right yeah he's in
a coma but I'm thinking what if the
doctor's Al-Qaeda I don't know I don't
know who this doctor is so I tore up a
sheet into strips and I tied his wrists
and his ankle an Les to the bed thinking
if somebody tries to break him out poor
guy's in a coma you're tying him down
like he he doesn't have enough suffering
for one
lifetime I thought if somebody tries to
break him out I'll hear it and I'll wake
up and I'll I don't know shoot someone I
don't know what I'm going to do
so I just sit at the foot of the bed and
I just stare at him he's in a coma for a
full 24 hours I am so tired
and hungry and I smell bad so I called
one of my buddies over at the safe house
I said buddy can you can you bring me
some clothes and some food I think I got
a pair of
underwear pair of socks and uh I got a
t-shirt in there and bring me some food
and and a coffee a big
one so about a half an hour later he
shows up and
um he gives me my underwear my socks the
only shirt I had was this shirt you know
about I can't believe you didn't wear
this today I was so upset when you
showed up at the door Danny Jones said
that like it never even occurred to me
to put the shirt on yeah tell people
what the shirt is so my kids had bought
me this shirt for Christmas it was a
fire engine red shirt with SpongeBob
Square Pants on it and we used to love
watching SpongeBob together when they
were little they're in their 20s and 30s
now and that was the only clean shirt I
had so I put the shirt on he brought me
some orange juice and coffee and some
crackers so I'm sitting there
and finally Abu zua begins to
stir
and I stand up at the foot of his bed I
put my hands on my hips and I'm looking
at
him and he's like tied down and he opens
just one eye of course he only had one
eye yeah right he opens his
eye and he doesn't look at me yeah he
looks at
SpongeBob and his pulse goes from 120 to
220 like in a second and the Machine
starts
going and then you hear code blue code
blue and these people rush in he saw
SpongeBob he knew it was up he was like
oh my God the Americans have
me and they're like
clear right and then they give him
demall and he's out out again and then I
just sat back down and I'm waiting and
waiting and waiting in like 6 hours
later um he starts to stir again so he
opens his eyes and now he's just looking
at me he's tied down he's just looking
at me staring at me and he goes like
this and motions for me to come over so
I go next to him and I moved his oxygen
mask off of his mouth and I said shme
what is your name and he shakes his head
so I said
again and then he says to me in English
I will not speak to you in God's
language M and I said that's okay abua
we know who you are and then he starts
crying and he says please brother kill
me take the pillow and kill me and I
said no nobody's going to kill
you I said you're going to get the best
medical care that the American
government can
provide that's not what he wanted to
hear no
and he wanted to know what was going to
happen to him and I said honestly I
don't know
I can tell you though that I am the
nicest guy that you're going to meet in
this experience my colleagues they are
not nice like I am I said the truth is
your life is
over but what remains can be easy or it
can be terrible and it's up to
you if you'll listen to some advice I
said it's that you have to
cooperate he said you seem like a nice
man but you're the enemy and I'll never
cooperate I said well it's up to
you so then I sat back down he would
just look at me and then kind of wave
for me to come
over I move his oxygen mask are you
Christian and I said yes I'm
Christian we have like he's like yeah
right we we have a lot in common I said
yes we do I studied Islam in college and
we actually do have a lot in common then
he wanted to tell me about his family he
cried a lot he said he would never know
the touch of a woman he would never know
the joy of fatherhood and I said you're
not the victim here there were 50,000
people in those towers that morning did
you think we wouldn't try to find you or
to find Bin Laden what did he say to
that he said he never wanted to attack
the United States on 911 did you believe
him yes because he was direct about it
he said all I ever wanted to do was kill
Jews and I was like oh well that puts it
into
perspective he just starts dying over
here so he wanted to attack Israel he
wanted to attack Israel and he said that
he had been um he had been
uh I mean it's not a democracy but
essentially
outvoted yeah now wasn't he not really
the number he was mostely not only was
he not the number three in al-Qaeda he
had never actually joined Al-Qaeda so
how did he even have a vote then well
just because he had never pledged fty
didn't mean that he wasn't an important
part of the of the organization's
Logistics yeah that's so confusing to me
that he never officially joined but he
had so much power and it was because he
was really good at what he did so he so
he's like Jimmy Conway from Good Fellas
he's not an Italian so he's not that is
The Perfect Analogy I wish I had thought
of that okay that's the Perfect Analogy
Jimmy Conway was Irish so he was never
going to be a member he was never going
to be made but he was an associate
that's what we should say all right you
can use that one he was an
associate so he was the one who founded
the uh House Of Martyrs the it's it's
called the house of Martyrs it's the
al-Qaeda Safe House in Pas Pakistan and
he was the one that founded
um and managed al-qaeda's two uh
training camps one in kahar and one in
lashara in Helman
Province
so those were important uh events yeah
he also was the logs guy so if you have
been in Afghanistan for a while you're
tired of the fight you want to go home
he'll get you out of the country he'll
get you a false passport and a ticket
home or you're arriving from the Middle
East he'll smuggle you in make sure
you're set up and get you on the payroll
so he was doing all these logistics for
them why did we think he was the number
three Ah that's The $64,000 Question
that's
it it's a low number yeah well that was
the the game show in the 50s
um he has a cousin a first cousin with
the same name Abu zua okay abu's real
name is z
uh Muhammad Hussein says n n is abua he
had a cousin also using the ner abuaba
okay so we're getting these reports Abu
Zeda is planning an attack in Aman wait
a minute two days later Abu Zeda is
planning an attack in in London oh no
abuaba it turns out he was in Montana
two years ago oh no abuaba is doing an
attack in in anara well we didn't know
there were two of them and so we thought
guy's a freaking terrorist
Superman I mean there was like a whole
Branch following AB aa oh my God he he
had a host family in Montana oh he's in
Paris he's studying in Paris oh my God
he went back to him on it was two guys
and one of them the other one was bad
too and as soon as we arrested the one
the other one just
disappeared we think he probably went to
to Jordan we we never figured it out who
yeah
so we thought well if this guy's
involved in so many the planning for so
many different attacks he's got to be
right beneath he's got to be right at
the top now the the actual number three
was Muhammad ATF but we killed Muhammad
ATF in in uh in um October of 2001 in
the Torah Bor in the Tor Boro as soon as
we started hitting to torab Bora we hit
the house that Muhammad ATF was in and
it turned out that
when the rocket came through the roof it
blew up the the uh kitchen table and A
Shard of wood from the table hit him in
the neck and killed him yeah good way to
go yeah
so who's going to be the number three it
must be this terrorist Superman we keep
reading about upu beta and that turned
out to just not be the case so before we
get there he survived this though he's
talking
how are you planning to like did you
know where they wanted to take him or
was I didn't have any idea and so what
happened was one of my colleagues came
in and said listen uh prepare for a
flight we're bringing a plane in and I
said uh where are they taking him he
said I have no idea so um I I told abua
you're going to be moved out of this
hospital and you're going to be taken
somewhere
else where he was panicked and I said I
don't know but I'm going to tell you
again you have to cooperate you have to
you don't have any leverage in this
relationship now you have to
cooperate so the plane landed he Hur the
plane land because remember the hospital
this Clinic is right on the
tarmac so the plane lands and he said
that's for me Isn't it and I said it is
so three FBI agents came um and the four
of us picked him up on the gurnie to
carry him out the plane he asked me to
hold his hand he's like weeping quietly
so I'm I'm holding the gurnie with one
hand I'm holding his hand so he has like
hinki syndrome with you oh yeah I was
kind to him I was the only one who was
kind to
him Ali sufan was kind the FBI
interrogator yeah so um we took him out
to the plane and we had to stand him up
which was really freaking hard cuz he's
dead weight right we had to stand him up
to get him to maneuver him like a couch
like you're moving a couch into the door
of the plane and then we carried him to
the back and we laid him on the luggage
rack and we tied the luggage rack down
and he's conscious oh yeah he all
morphine lots of morphine and I'm
telling you man we are soaked in his
blood I had to throw away all my clothes
the the the SpongeBob the SpongeBob I
kept just cuz I thought it had
historical value we need it we'll put
we'll wear it on a pod
and then we'll frame it yeah and we'll
sell it I thought about framing it yeah
I actually offered it up to the uh Spy
Museum and they said oh yeah we'd love
to have it and then they just never now
like it's a red shirt so like is his
blood stains like seeped into it you
can't really tell you can tell some of
the spots see you know at first I just
didn't really realize the significance
of the shirt and so I used it to paint
in I painted my living room so it has
specs of pain on Ito my God I know
because I'm an idiot oh my
God God damn it all right we we'll talk
about that later so so I I when we tied
him down I leaned over and I said
remember you have to cooperate and he
squeezed my hand and
then that was it and you did not know
where he was going at all no idea in
fact I the guys who were on the plane
the agency guys were on the plane were
dressed completely in black with black
hoods yeah and one of them says John and
I said who are you and he lifts up his
hood and it it was my last boss in
CTC and I said what are you doing here
it's like you're out of [__] Dunkin
Donuts yeah what are you doing here he
said I came to pick up your prisoner who
is he and I said oh dude I'm sorry you
don't have a need to know because this
was such a compartment compartmentalized
operation I said I'm sorry you don't
have a need to know where are you taking
him and he goes oh dude I'm sorry you
don't have a need to know and I said
touche and we gave each other a hug and
I got off the plane and then they they
took him now he didn't go straight to
Guantanamo oh no no it was years before
he went to Guantanamo so he went to a
bunch of black sites I think it was six
altogether before he finally went to
Guantanamo now this is one thing and
it'll come up in a few minutes here when
we get to it but like when you were
later giving the ABC interview the
infamous ABC interview that ended up
causing all the problems for
you you said something
like like you said in a very John kyaku
way but something along the lines of
yeah he held out so long it took him 30
seconds before the water boarding got to
him but as it turned out allegedly they
waterboarded this guy like 85
times 83 times there's a there's a story
there what's the story well when he
arrived at the secret site and listen
the media have reported you just can't
say where I I can't say because the CIA
has never confirmed the location of
these sites but all you have to do is
Google CIA secret sites and they all pop
right up yep North Africa Poland [__]
there's a long people can Google it yeah
so they took him to the site it took him
about six weeks to recover from the
gunshots and
um and sufan an FBI agent um was
assigned to interrogate him again 911
was an open criminal investigation so
FBI has precedent FBI had had Primacy
even though this was overseas so
normally the CIA has Primacy overseas
the FBI has Primacy domestically but the
FBI had this you love that it it just it
killed people at headquarters it killed
them God they hated
it but I I genuinely like and respect
Ali and I I did when we were in Pakistan
you know at the
FBI Ali was not an FBI agent he was an
FBI
translator and so as a translator he
topped out at
gs12 and FBI agents go up to gs15 and
then the senior um executive service so
he was treated as a second class citizen
at the FBI undeservedly so he was
brilliant and he was really good at what
he did he came up under John O'Neal he
came up under John O'Neal exactly and
listen if you can work under John O'Neal
and Thrive then you're somebody special
yeah
so after six weeks Ali began to
interrogate him and I've said in other
podcasts I have
to admit that the FBI is just really
really good at interrogations they've
been doing this since the nurur Trials
of 1945 and 1946 they're just really
good at it um they establish a rapport
with the subject and they do that by
being kind and offering a cup of coffee
or a cigarette or an orange or if you're
really good a piece of paper and a
pencil that you can write to your
parents oh M yep send it to the Red
Cross and they deliver it so Ali
established this rapport with abuaba and
abuaba began after a period of four five
six weeks uh began to open up and he
gave
us absolutely critical intelligence he
was MTAR right no he told us who MTAR
was right right right no no I'm saying
like he was the guy that that got you
him yeah yes there were two things that
he gave us that were so important yeah
stay with the m sorry there were two
things that he gave us that were so
important one was the al-Qaeda um wiring
diagram we just didn't have any idea how
this organization was set up we knew
there was there was Bin Laden there was
zaahi and then we just didn't
know so we asked him how how are
operations uh determined like who who
comes up with the idea to do a bombing
here or an assassination there or
whatever and he explained it to us that
these are highly compartmentalized
individual cells so if you're in London
you have no idea what the Paris people
are doing you don't even know if there
are Paris people you don't know what
their names are you don't know what
their operations are uh they're going to
do um and they're running it like an
intelligence organization exactly like
an intelligence organization if you
don't have a need to know you don't know
yeah
so II said to him as an example it's an
example I use all the time if you were
going to do an operation in dorf how
would you do that and he said oh there's
this guy
Muhammad and here's Muhammad's cell
phone number and Muhammad's got a cousin
Abdullah and Abdullah has access to uh
weapons and abdullah's got a friend
Rashid he lives nearby and he has access
to explosives so then we could go to the
Germans and say you have a serious
problem in dorf and you need to grab
these guys and then they bust down the
door that night and they grabb these
guys so now there's no attack in dorf so
that's what he gave us and then he was
talking about MTAR MTAR was The
Mastermind of the 911 attacks we had no
idea what his true identity was we knew
that there was this really bad guy out
there named MTAR who was operational
since at least 1996 and how did you
originally find out about him yeah uh we
found about him we found out about him
through the
Philippines uh he was planning an
operation called the bojinka
operation and the plan was to hijack as
many as 14
747s out of Manila Airport and fly them
into 14 buildings up and down the west
coast of the United States yeah so we
knew he was Al-Qaeda we knew his n deera
was MTAR and we knew that he was serious
dangerous we had no idea who he was now
he went out one day he left his
apartment one day apparently to get you
know lunch or whatever and a cleaning
lady went into the apartment to clean
and saw all these plans and maps and
pictures and said this looks like a
terrorist
attack so she calls the cops this is in
'96 96 she calls the cops cops come and
they say holy [__] this looks like a
terrorist attack we better call the
Philippine in uh intelligence service
they come and they say o we better call
the
CIA and so we take all this information
we're like this could have been epically
bad but we don't know who this guy is
and abuaba actually laughed and said you
don't know who MTAR is and Ali said no
and he said he's khed shik Muhammad oh
he just gave it right up
mhm wow we had never heard that name
before so everybody's going nuts at
headquarters doing name traces on KH
shik Muhammad and lo and behold they see
that he was educated in North
Carolina and he lived with an American
family like as an exchange student what
happened to him how did he become this
guy he said later that what radicalized
him was news video of an Israeli soldier
with his boot on the neck of a
Palestinian woman and he just decided
then I'm going to kill every Jew I can
and every American who supports the Jews
whoa that's it it was one event like
that the long arm of foreign
policy so that began the hunt for khed
shik
Muhammad and um you know once we had an
identification when was when was uh
Abu zua torture was it after sufan talk
with him well that's kind of that's kind
of the uh the kicker in this whole thing
so here's Ali sufan just breaking new
ground and writing all this stuff up but
remember what I said the FBI computer
system is not compatible with the CIA
computer system so wait you don't have
CIA guys sitting in there with them no
and the CIA we're sitting there like
this like Whoa We we wonder what up was
the beta saying Jose Rodriguez is
[__] hitting the [__] the charges
together like let's go and this is this
is a long answer to the question you
asked about me when I said that he was
waterboarded once and he
broke um
so for reasons that have never been
explained on July
31st 2002 George tenant went to the
White House and met with the president
president and he said I want you to
remove the FBI from the secret site and
I want the CIA to have primary Primacy
rather on opposite
beta and for reasons that have never
been explained George W bush agreed to
do that he said you're going to give me
wmd and a wreck you got yourself a deal
that's
right so the FBI knew exactly what was
going to happen and
and uh uh meller was what's his first
name Robert Robert Mueller who was the
FBI director at the time oh sorry you're
good it that doesn't affect the mic at
all that doesn't Robert Mueller who was
the FBI director at the time decided to
withdraw all FBI Personnel not just from
the secret site but from the country
that the secret site was in he's like we
know what these CIA guys are going to do
they're going to go completely nuts we
don't want any part of it everybody
withdrew within 48 Hours the CIA began
to torture abua right the SoCal they
haven't shared any information no so the
CIA still doesn't know about KH shik
Muhammad that's
unclear we don't know if maybe Ali told
some colleagues and the colleagues told
the CIA but whatever happened we had
these two CIA contractors out there two
psychologists who had come up with the
torture program right what are their
names again Mitchell and jesson they
live in Florida now yeah they million or
something yeah uh altogether 108 million
oh nice so
Mitchell and Justin began torturing him
mercilessly and they waterboard him 83
times but why would you waterboard
somebody 83 times because the first 82
times it didn't
work right he didn't give you anything
he didn't give you anything at all in
fact he just clammed up so what they did
was they went into the FBI computers
they pulled out Ali San's reports they
retyped them in the CIA dat know this
uhhuh this is from the inspector
General's report of 2005 that was
released in 2009 and they said oh my God
we waterboarded him once and look what
he gave us we need to look for this khed
shik Muhammad guy and somebody called
dorf so we're getting these reports I
don't remember this wow we're getting
these reports back and I'm at
headquarters and I I remember saying to
my boss holy [__] maybe I'm wrong about
this
it it looks like it's actually working
it's still deplorable oh because this
was when we got off this earlier but you
when you came back from the Abu zua
thing in mayot you got promoted and
someone approached you and said hey you
want to be you want to be trained in
enhanced interrogation I said not a
chance I I said I think it's illegal
it's immoral and unethical I don't want
any part of
it now you're reading about the guy you
arrested giving this up you're like oh
[__] oh [__] I was wrong
well I I left the CIA in 2004 thinking I
was wrong wow it in 2005 the Inspector
General said wait one second none of
this [__] was true it was all stolen
from the
FBI and then they Declassified that in
2009 the reason why it wasn't so
newsworthy is because it was released on
the morning that Ted Kennedy
died and so all the news was the end of
the Kennedy era right and it was kind of
bar oh that's on purpose they're like oh
Kennedy's dead hit him do it now I mean
otherwise they would release it at 7
o'clock on a Friday before before a
Monday holiday that's right yeah so um
they had called you behind the scenes
though like the human rights guy or
something right you were like made fun
of at CIA for being Against torture yeah
I was the human rights guy why did you
I'm I'm just curious cuz you've just
come back from Pakistan you just
captured a really bad guy you know we're
n months8 months past 9/11 it's In the
Heat of the global war on terror and yet
at the time you have the presence of
mind to be able to step back and you
know not to say humanize these people
but you're like US Constitution there
are rights we need to be above that as
America what what made you so automatic
with that I believed very firmly that
we're we're either going to be that
Shining Beacon of light for human rights
and civil rights and civil liberties or
The Shining City on a Hill as Ronald
Reagan called us or we're not if you
want to get into the mud you you debase
yourself and you put yourself on their
level you John McCain once said never
get into a fight with a pig you'll both
get dirty Pig likes it but the pig likes
it yeah yeah no we're better than that
we're supposed to be better than that we
can't debase ourself were there other
things you had seen at CIA before then
though in your 12 years before that
conversation that weren't necessarily
torture but were things that technically
broke the Constitution that you went
along with no really yeah nothing no
especially during the Clinton years I
mean it was all about rule of law during
the Clinton years they were really
really serious about nobody doing
anything illegal in fact B clintons the
clintons Bob Bob bear I know right Bob
bear is a pretty famous former CIA
officer um he's written a bunch of books
one was made into the movie Serana that
starred George yeah so
Bob yeah Bob is retired and and living
in uh Colorado and
uh and Bob took it on the chin during
the Clinton administration
because he he had developed a a network
of sources in Northern Iraq and was
making plans to assassinate Saddam
Hussein
which he believed to be in the National
interest and
NSA intercepted one of his
Communications and sent it to Sandy
Berger who was the National Security
adviser and Sandy Berger called the CIA
and said your guys is going to do an
extra constitutional assassination
either you pull him back or he's under
arrest for
conspiracy so they pulled Bob back out
of Iraq and they and they um they told
him you got to go that would have
changed history
yeah yeah so they they were serious but
once 9/11 happened man everything
changed everything and that's what I'm
saying you did you really didn't though
no I didn't we're either a nation of
laws or we're not because this this is
this is one of those issues where and
this happen so often with me where I'm
right in the middle of you and booon
sure because I don't know where it's
it's first of all the anytime you use
the line especially in high stake
scenarios that if I were blank then I
would blank that is a dangerous thing CU
you don't [__] know what you would do
you don't know okay not until it's
presented to you that's right and you
got to make a a decision but when when I
listen to you like because I I I admire
your stance on this a lot and and and
how much like you have walked the talk
with this for the last 20 plus years of
your life in every possible way up to an
including [__] going to prison for I
admire that a lot sometimes I wonder
though I'm like man here you have a guy
who was a Savage spy like you did some
real [__] you were talented you got
really high up in the CIA you were about
it you you obviously care a lot about
the country and being able to protect it
and all these things y but there's a
small part of it where I'm like is
John not even that this makes you wrong
but it's just a complicated world I'm
like is Jon too much of an idealist on
certain things Dick Cheney once said
that he would rather imprison a 100
innocent men than to let a guilty one go
yeah see that's [__] up and I'm the
opposite of that yeah that's where I
stand and you know maybe it is a a
little idealist but you know I really
truly believe in the
Constitution and this just seemed so
outrageously wrong to me listen I'll
give you I'll give you a couple of
examples that I like to use because
they're quite clear-cut in
1946 we executed Japanese soldiers who
had waterboarded American PS yeah that
was a death penalty offense to
waterboard someone and we like imprison
people in Vietnam for doing that right
well in 196 in January of
1968 The Washington Post ran a front
page photograph of an American Soldier
waterboarding a North Vietnamese
prisoner the Secretary of Defense at the
time Robert mamera ordered an immediate
investigation that Soldier was arrested
he was charged with torture y convicted
and sentenced to 20 years at
lenworth well the law literally never
changed never so it's a death penalty
offense in 1946 it's worthy of 20 years
at hard labor in 1968 2002 h no we can
do it now just cuz we're the good guys
they're the bad guys cuz they hit us
here yeah but the thing is I've said
this from the very beginning reasonable
people can agree to disagree but if you
want to torture somebody you've got to
change the law and the law never changed
and then now that's a that's a that's a
very good poison pill argument I've
heard you make because it's just black
and white it's like that's where you
take the gray this and you say well the
black and white we know is the law so
all right you want to do it like I I
John kyaku May disagree with that but if
you change the law I would have to
accept that I have to accept it I might
you know campaign against it and join
demonstrations or whatever but if that's
the law That's the Law okay then here's
a difficult question to ask for that a
guy who I think was faced with an
impossible decision who I know you're a
supporter of and frankly I am too I
speak highly of him is Edward Snowden
Edward Snowden was stuck I always say
this in between two awful slippery
slopes on the one hand he breaks his
oath and breaks the chain of command to
leak information that then has risk to
potential people you know maybe dying as
a result of it or whatever and also more
importantly sets a precedent that the
next guy who wants to leak something may
have something 99% is important but then
they can point at Snowden and all the
way down eventually it's at 1% and
people are leaking whatever they want
right on the other hand of it he had
tried to go through the chain of command
because he caught something that was
anti-constitutional it was against it
was cut and dry against the Constitution
yes what was being done and no one was
doing [__] about it the reason I bring
this up though is because technically
and let me highlight the word
technically Dick Cheney and his minions
around him had changed the law to allow
that to happen now they did it in a very
dirty way yes but they did what you just
said would have needed to be done with
torture so di Cheney and his minions had
changed the law would you feel the same
if if you or someone like Snowden had
leaked that yes and but that's that's
actually an easy question for me much
easier than it would be for Ed Snowden
because the US is also a signatory to
the United Nations convention on uh
torture and cruel and demeaning
punishment I think is the full title of
it we were actually the authors of it
and when an international treaty uh is
uh is approved in the Senate it carries
with it the force of Law and it
it
supersedes any domestic law so we would
also have to withdraw from the United
Nations convention Against torture which
would cause you know chaos
internationally on the
issue okay yeah yeah um you know you
raised a really important Point too
about the chain of command Ed Snowden
you're right couldn't go through his
chain of command um shut him down yeah I
couldn't go through my chain of command
my chain of command was Jose [__]
Rodriguez I'm
serious um there's another whistleblower
an NSA whistleblower and quite an
important one named Thomas Drake so
Tom's a great great friend of mine can
you tell for people that aren't familiar
can you tell that story because that's
pretty wild sure Tom Drake was a was a a
colonel in the Air Force and he uh left
the Air Force to go to NSA in the senior
intelligence service right so he's a
very senior executive level officer at
NSA his very first day on the job was
911 and so he gets there and an hour
later all hell breaks loose so what he
sees on his very first day is General
Michael Hayden implementing something
called um thin thread operation thin
thread on 911 on 911 911 Hayden actually
said this that day 911 was the greatest
possible gift to NSA he said that uhhuh
he said it now did is that out of
context like did he say it no it was
quite in context because what he meant
was now that the gloves are off we can
intercept anything we want anywhere in
the world so Patriot Act uhhuh and you
know it's common oh yeah so operation
thin thread allows them to
just vacuum up every phone call every
text message every email every bit of
metadata from Every American anywhere in
the world well it's against the law to
spy on Americans and it's against the
law it's against it it's actually in
nsa's Charter that they're not allowed
to spy Americans well thin thread
changed everything because the idea is
well these Americans may be talking to
terrorists so we have to grab everything
and then we can sort out the details
later the problem is though that bill
biny Kirk weeby um and
um Ed Lumis three NSA officers had
developed a
competing uh program called Stellar Wind
yes so Stellar Wind that's what snowed
and leaked yeah so Stellar
Wind would be able to collect the same
kind of data while protecting
Americans and Hayden decided no
we want to grab all of
it well that's illegal and so Tom Drake
God bless him went to his boss he said
look this is illegal his boss said Tom
mind your own
business so Tom goes to the Inspector
General which is exactly what you're
supposed to do the Inspector General was
not read into the compartment and so he
said I don't know what you're talking
about I never heard of any of these
programs so he goes to The General
Counsel The General Counsel says I
advise you to keep your big mouth shut
so then he goes to the Pentagon
Inspector General because NSA is a DOD
agency the Pentagon Inspector General
reports him to the FBI and says we think
you have a spy on your hands oh my God
and all of the evidence that he brought
out of this crime being committed at NSA
the Pentagon Inspector General turned
over to the
FBI rather than to keep it secret like
you're supposed to wow well when he
didn't get any satisfaction there he did
exactly what you're supposed to do and
he went to the house permanent select
committee on intelligence Diane RoR was
the officer there and he said a major
crime is being committed against the
American people at NSA here's the
evidence they arrested everybody they
arrested Bill Benny Bill Benny who lost
both of his legs to a flesh eating
bacteria is in the shower on a shower
chair and the FBI pulls him out of the
shower naked with no legs and cuffs him
behind his back how's that for a Class
Act they arrest Kirk weeby they arrest
Ed Lumis they arrest Tom Drake Diane R
they didn't arrest but she ended up
being forced out of the intelligence
committee and she moved back to Oregon
what the hell did she do wrong she some
guy walked in that was it nothing Tom
Drake is charged with with nine felonies
including seven counts of Espionage and
two counts of theft of government
property the property being the
information he walked out of the
building with the information in his
head and that was two felony counts of
theft that's some dystopian [__] yeah it
is on the morning of his arrest the FBI
went to his wife who was also an NSA
officer and they said we are arresting
your husband and raiding your house
right now you're either with him or
you're with us and she said I'm with
you so Tom lost everything lost his
pension lost his wife lost his children
lost his security clearance lost his
job the case fell apart he hadn't
committed Espionage he did exactly as he
was supposed to do so all of the charges
were
dismissed but he ended up working the
next 10 years at the Apple Store in
Bethesda Maryland as a member of The
Genius Bar oh my God
MH and you're friends with him today
yeah very good friends and what what's
he up to now he's fighting cancer oh
because life just is one great big bull
of cherries isn't
it that's insane man yeah now your story
though didn't happened till after you
left so you well it started with you
denying to want to be a part not not
want to be a part of it don't want to be
a part of it and I'll tell you I didn't
say anything back then because I was
convinced that this was so illegal that
certainly somebody at the secret site is
going to come out and say something yeah
right because I'm seeing these cables
coming back from the site saying I
resign I didn't sign up for this this is
an Abomination there was one who said
this is a violation of my hypocritic
oath I'm not doing this I resign
secretaries fainting when they're seeing
the torture sessions and then coming
back it's called curtailing your your
assignment to come back early that is a
career ending decision to say I I can't
do this I'm coming back career-ending
decision you're never going to get
promoted again so I thought well surely
I mean there are so many people who's
saying that this is a monstrous
Abomination surely somebody's going to
say something
and they didn't so you leave in ' 04 you
go to deoe and touche we talked about
that in the early part of our
conversation was probably separate
episode and you have the whole career
now you by the way like how did you feel
being out of government you basically
have never worked outside of government
being a history teacher while you were
in graduate school yeah I had never
worked outside government but I was I
was thrilled to do something different I
didn't think I was going to miss it I I
wanted something that had nothing to do
with terrorism or Espionage or or
political backbiting I wanted something
completely different and they paid me
like exactly double what I was making at
the agency so you were you were
basically tired from a long career that
you're like it's it's time now is your
wife still in CIA she stayed in she
stayed in and what kind are you allowed
to say what kind of job she had you said
she was senior but she was in analysis
on uh on Iran
okay so she's still in during this time
you're working at deoe life is pretty
good and you get a phone call from a
reporter Brian Ross is that his name
correct from ABC this is like 07 I want
to say December of 07 and he says that
he has a source from the CIA no he had a
source okay but he wouldn't say where I
I was able to P it down later he said he
had a source who said that I had
tortured up a beta I said absolutely
true I said I was the only person who
was kind to Abu
Zeda and he says well you're welcome to
come on the show and defend yourself had
you ever talked with a journalist before
this no never and I see and I if I had
spoken to journalist in the past I would
have realized that that was an old
reporters trick but I didn't I was like
oh my God they're going to accuse me in
National Television of being a torturer
and I I'm the only one who
wasn't so he said well you're welcome to
come on the show and defend yourself I
said I'll think about it are you
thinking like are you getting paranoid
like holy [__] maybe the same guys who
were calling me like human rights guys
are now going to try to pin this whole
thing that is exactly what I was
thinking so I'm thinking about it and
then in the next couple days two things
happened one President Bush gives a
press conference and a reporter asks him
about about torture he looks right in
the camera and he goes we do not torture
I did not have sex with that woman Miss
Lewinsky I did not have sex with that
woman Miss
Lewinsky so I said to my wife he's a
bald-faced liar he is looking the
American people in the eye and he's just
lying right to our faces and then a
couple of days later it's Friday and
he's he he walks out of the South
Portico of the White House and he's
walking to the helicopter to go to Camp
David and a reporter shouts a question
about about torture and he stops and he
turns and says well if there is torture
it's because of a rogue CIA
officer and I said to her I said Brian
Ross's source is at the White House and
they're going to pin this on me so I
called Brian Ross and I said what's your
wife saying cuz she's still in she's
still in she says you have to defend
yourself oh she does oh
yeah so I called Brian Ross and I said
I'll give you your interview and I
decided in the like 4 days between that
call and the actual interview I just
decided that whatever he asked me I
would tell the truth did you consult
with a lawyer that was the most critical
mistake that I made in this entire
experience you didn't I did
not were you okay so you're not
Consulting with a lawyer but were you
think obviously you're thinking about
all the possible questions he could ask
you and therefore if you're going to be
honest what you would say but were you
reviewing yourself what could or could
not be classified oh yeah definitely in
fact my my wife went with me to ABC she
sat just off camera and afterwards I
said how she going like this no no no
she sat there she sat there you know
supportively and I said uh how did I do
she goes great I said I didn't say
anything classified right and she said
no you were
great so I was like okay I did my part
all right so online there's especially
like with
Wikipedia when things are written on
there who the [__] knows should probably
check that huh yeah you should probably
check that out so some of this like
needs to get writed from what was then
done in court or whatever but I I want
to try to simplify this for people so
you don't you do this
interview how soon did you know you were
under investigation afterwards the next
day the next day the next day CNN
reported that the FBI was investigating
me okay at the request of the CIA and
they investigated you for like a year a
year from December of 07 to December of
08 did you have meetings with them with
an attorney during this time I hired an
attorney immediately and the attorney um
a couple of times uh spoke to the FBI
and then the FBI sent him a declination
letter A year later a year later
December of 08 they said they were
declining to prosecute me that they had
determined I had not committed a crime
now is that legally binding is that
supposed to be legally buying no it's
just their decision at the time that
they they don't think there's a crime
here meaning they could open it up in
the future if they wanted to yeah highly
unusual highly unusual so you continue
working at theoe during this time right
no actually you moved to a new place um
well oh this is when you worked for John
Carrey right I was going to John Cary um
deoe see I went to my partner at Dee and
I said listen there's there's this thing
you you need to know know about with the
guy yeah in the place right exactly so I
I told him and he's like oh [__] I said
I know I I I I can't get out of it right
either either the president himself is
going to accuse me of torturing a
prisoner or I'm going to blow the
whistle on the cia's torture program so
he said go defend yourself he wrote he
wrote me a letter saying go defend
yourself so the next day it's like a
glor mobile story it's the front page of
every paper of the world right after the
ABC interview yeah ABC broke the story
and then the next day it's like all
hell's breaking
loose and he calls me he's like where
are you I said I'm in New York I was
given interviews to literally everybody
that day I was on every Network in
America that day he said I'm in Dallas
fly to Dallas right now I was like well
that's not good so I fly to Dallas he's
like I'm going to fire you I said said
oh you are are you I have news for you I
have a letter with your signature on it
telling me to go on this
interview and he said I didn't know it
was going to be this big National story
I said well neither did I but you told
me to go do the
interview well then I want you to resign
and I said [__] that I'm not resigning I
said man you better have your checkbook
ready show me the money baby I'm I said
if you you think that I'm going to make
this easy for you you don't know me at
all I told
him I
did so there was an employment lawyer in
my lawyer's firm and she's like oh you
have these guys by the
balls so they were like we want you to
resign we want you to resign he said I'm
not going to resign I'm not going to do
it you can't fire me because I have your
signature right here so they said we
want to offer you a buyout and I saidit
better be
handsome and they made me an offer I
couldn't refuse yeah you're in the right
neighborhood to say that right now and
where did you go uh I worked for myself
for a year and then uh then the 2008
election uh brought the Democrats uh
back to Power and then I got a call from
John KY that he's going to be the new
chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee how long had you known him I
had never met
oh really but he followed my my story my
whistleblowing oh so he liked it m he
liked that you were doing that he liked
it that's interesting because this was
the administration that later had the
justice department charge you how do you
like that yeah so he says I'm going to
reconstitute the Senate Foreign
Relations committee's investigative
function would you like to be the chief
investigator and I said I'd love to be
the chief investigator I said but I'm
going to go after the CIA and he said
'well you do what you think you need to
do I said ' all right so you work for
John Carrey uhhuh how was he difficult
yeah you know there were
only there were
only two or three times two times I
guess where I I offered him unsolicited
advice like you got to stop I would tell
him there was one
situation like every Lebanese in
Washington was calling me like you gotta
tell Carrie to stop calling Bashar
al-assad my dear friend you got to stop
saying that he's a genocidal Maniac so I
I I said Senator I said every freaking
Lebanese in Washington's calling me you
got to stop calling Bashar alassad my
dear friend he goes well we rode
motorcycles together to go on Heights I
said be that as it may he has a bad
habit of slaughtering his own people and
the Lebanese are really steamed about it
he's like all right all right all right
and there were several other things that
I did I mean it wasn't just giving him
advice but you I I went to Afghanistan U
to do a study on on the heroin poppy
crop oh boy and I'll tell you nobody
liked it that I was doing this so I fly
Afghanistan and as a senior staff member
I have the rank of Brigadier General
right so they got to like drop
everything and cater to my needs
seriously were you wait so you're
investigating potential Mal around these
fields Afghanistan used to be a net food
exporter and as soon as the US takes
over they're producing 93% of the
world's heroin that's right I'd like to
know how the [__] that happened yeah I
would too yeah nobody wanted to tell me
so I get to bamer base and I said I'm
going to need a helicopter to lashara
and they were like oh can't do it too
dangerous I was like no we're doing it
like in the next hour
you have to be a dick with these people
sometimes right
because
they they think that they can just they
can just pacify you until it's time to
leave and I'm like no I outrank you I'm
telling you get a pilot and fly me to
lashara so we get down there and it's a
god- awful place but man I'm telling you
as far as your eye can see all there is
is Poppy
all of it is Poppy so I said I want to
talk to a poppy Farmer they were like
are you nuts and I said no I'm serious I
want to talk to a poppy farmer so we go
out to the poppy fields we see this guy
cultivating his poppy so I go up to him
and I said
uh I got to ask you a question which was
incredibly naive I
said why don't you grow crops that have
two growing seasons instead of poppy you
could grow tomatoes or onions or
pomegranates and he goes like this he
goes the Americans told me in 2001 if I
told them where the Arabs were I could
grow all the poppy I wanted I go what
Americans told you you could grow poppy
and my military hander is like we got to
go Bogey's in the area we got to go and
he physically pulls me into the Jeep and
takes me back to the helicopter I was
like ah
okay so I make an appointment to go to
this DEA secret
site somebody had reached out to me and
said hey we heard you're doing this
study and you might want to come out
here we can have lunch nearby I was like
okay so I I get my car I drive out to
Timbuktu outside Washington freaking far
and there's this secret
DEA facility out there so there three of
them we go out to lunch and they were
like you're in over your head I said how
do you
figure they're like there are very
powerful forces that want that Poppy to
be
cultivated and I said why it's 93% of
the world's
heroin and they said because almost all
of that heroin goes to Iran and to
Russia and we want them to be addicted
to heroin it weakens their
societies almost all of it goes to those
two places and it's 93% of the world's
heroin our heroin comes from Columbia
and Mexico and
Ecuador what about the andretta though
getting the heroin from Afghanistan that
happens too but it's small
scale so I'm writing all this up and
car's like n we're not we're not
publishing that and I was like like ah
they got to him too there was a Worse
episode I get a call one day from a
noted um human rights
activist uh for one of the big human
rights organizations and he says uh can
can I see you I said sure he said I
can't come up to the hill it's got to be
at a private location so I went to
John's Hopkins University and we met in
a vacant classroom and he's like listen
I've stumbled onto something
big he goes have you ever heard of the
dashy Lele Massacre and I said sure
Northern Afghanistan November 30th and
December 1st
2001 we arrested well in in in maseri
Sharif up north in Afghanistan 2,000
Taliban soldiers gave up all 2,000 all
at the same
time so there's not a prison in
Afghanistan big enough to hold 2,000
people so we figured we have to divide
them up and put them in uh Regional
jails around the country so we asked
abdar Rashid
doam this [__] traitor who was with
the Northern Alliance then he was with
the Taliban then he's with the Northern
Alliance again now he's with the Taliban
again so he said I'll I'll take them
we'll take them out into the desert and
we'll just hold them there until we can
divide them up into smaller groups and
send them around to to local
jails so they put them all in shipping
containers right to put them on 18
wheelers nobody put any holes for air in
the shipping containers and there's no
food and water and so they get out to
the desert they open the shipping
containers and one of the 16 survivors
said that the bodies fell out like
sardines from a can
well we always belied doam did it on
purpose right why would you feed and
clothe and house 2,000 Taliban prisoners
when you can just suffocate
them so what was new was this human
rights activist
said I have a witness who was 12 years
old at the time and he says that there
were two men there at the site of the
What's called the Box up where they were
putting them onto the into the
containers two men wearing black
t-shirts and blue jeans and speaking
English who is going to be in Maser
Sharie in November of 2001 wearing blue
jeans and black
t-shirts and speak in English yeah I I
mean duh
yeah so I took the information
and I wrote a letter to the CIA asking
for clarification
I see why they charged this guy and I
and I I did it under John K's signature
so it was you know sincerely John krey
chairman us committee on Foreign
Relations oh so you didn't sign it
yourself no no okay no Carrie signed
it I waited weeks for a response finally
one of my colleagues comes in and he
says Hey the agency responded to your
letter I said I just checked my mail an
hour ago I didn't see any response he
said no they classified it top secret
well at the time I only had a secret
clearance on the committee I said what'
it say he says it said go [__]
yourself I said uhhuh that's how they
want to play and then Carrie calls me
hey come over to the office so I go over
to his office he goes are you trying to
take on the CIA on this maseri Sharif
thing and I said this is a legitimate
investigation into a massacre that the
CIA may have had perhaps a tangential
role in he's like yeah kill this right
now I go okay killed it that happened
several times with him because all he
was ever concerned about was becoming
Secretary of State it's he talked about
it constantly I'll give you another
example he was an egomaniac oh in the
worst way give you another example in
that year between when I left deoe and
when I went to uh to the Senate Foreign
Relations Committee I was working for
myself by I had an
office in a in a major Washington
consulting firm the the head of it had
been a white house chief of staff and he
liked me he liked my politics and so he
said hey I've got a vacant office you're
welcome to use it and you can have a
halftime secretary at his expense very
generous so I'm there one of the members
of the board of directors was governor
Bill Richardson and I loved Richardson
you like that guy oh he was
awesome awesome had some interesting
ties to Jeffrey Epstein but we'll leave
yeah he had problems yeah but he was an
awesome guy okay
so he says to me one day he goes Hey
listen you free for lunch I said sure we
go to lunch he goes you never get to
believe what
happened he goes uh I had Obama over at
my house for uh for Christmas wasn't he
like secretary energy or something
Secretary of Energy ambassador of the
United Nations and congressman and
governor of uh yeah new mexic
got I had Biden over my house watch the
Super Bowl not Christmas Super Bowl
Biden oh sorry
Obama and I go yeah he said we went for
a walk around the ranch at halftime and
he put his arm around my shoulder and he
said
Bill if you can deliver the Hispanic
vote Secretary of
State and I said no way he goes you want
to be Deputy Chief of Staff I said I'll
take
he said okay I said
okay so the election comes up Obama
wins the day after the election
Richardson comes in the office and I go
Mr secretary congratulations he's like
oh my God I can't believe it I can't
wait it's going to be great we're going
to do this we're going to do that we're
peace in the Middle East and he's going
on and on okay I'm in the shower a week
or two later and I'm scrubbing my hair I
get the radio going and they said
president-elect Barack Obama today named
Hillary Clinton Secretary of State and I
was
like what Hillary Clinton I go in the
office I go I'm so sorry he goes they're
offering me
Commerce and I said that's okay we can
work with that there's the foreign
commercial service there's the
international trade representative he
goes like this he goes what the [__] do
I know about Commerce I said no
seriously we can do
this couple of weeks later again I'm in
the
shower uh Secretary of Commerce
designate Bill Richardson withdrew
himself from nomination today saying
that you know he was not whatever I was
like damn it so I didn't go to state but
then Carrie calls and I go to uh I go to
the Senate Foreign Relations commit so
Carrie asks me to go with him one day to
a speech he was giving at the Brookings
institution one problem with carry is
that he thinks he is so
smart yeah that he can Veer wildly off
of his prepared text and everything's
cool okay and that's never the case read
the prompt to Ron Burgundy read the
prompter that's why you employ all these
people to write for the prompter
so we're at Brookings and he's doing his
speech and then he says something about
Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and
he says you
know I was supposed to be Secretary of
State I had President Obama over to my
house for Christmas year before the
election and we went for a walk Carrie
says thisuh and he said to me John if
you become the first Senator to endorse
me secretary of
state so I endorsed him he says I was
the first Senator to endorse Barack
Obama he says and I had a long
relationship with Hillary Clinton it
caused a and I'm going like this in the
audience stop
talking so wait did he just steal the
story no that actually happened Obama
promised four people Secretary of
State krie Richardson Clinton eventually
and the guy who died in his office the
the peace
negotiator
uh what peace negotiator Bosnia and
Middle East oh come on come on come
on I have no idea what was he a senator
no he was a lifelong
Diplomat no idea we got to we got to
Google this peace negotiator Bosnia
Middle East us he he pulled the same
stunt on four people what a what a
talented son of a [__]
brutal brutal oh my God and they let's
see Daniel Levy no U us peace
negotiator and and Bosnia put because
otherwise we'll get all these
uh let's see D Richard Holbrook yeah
Richard Holbrook so he promised four
people yeah well two of them eventually
did become uh-huh what what a Washington
thing to do that's a very Washington
brutal you know Harry Truman once
famously said if you want a friend in
Washington buy a dog yeah it's a great
quote Yeah so you're working for Kerrie
though while he's on the Senate Foreign
Rel Relations Committee and then how did
it happen that your case got reopened it
had to do with John Brennan Obama but
what what went on right so John Brennan
was literally the only former senior Cia
officer to endorse Obama yeah all the
others were pretty evenly split between
John McCain and Hillary Clinton so when
Obama won he named brenon CIA director
but the Liberals were up in arms because
Brennan was one of the fathers of the
torture program which he later said in
that 2015 documentary CIA spy Masters
and the crosshairs or whatever by the N
day Brothers he tried to paint himself
cuz he was the current head of the CIA
at that point as someone who's like the
CIA should be above torture I'm like
Mala you [__]
he he made all that [__] up he was the
he was the deputy executive director of
the CIA at the time so he was in the
briefings every single day yeah and you
knew him well very well I knew him from
when I was from the day I was hired wow
yeah he was a he was a gs14 nobody when
I was hired in the office of near
Eastern in South Asian analysis yeah he
must be like a good behind the scenes
guy cuz the lack of Charisma on that
dude oh there's a story that I probably
can't get into but yeah it's connections
yeah all right so so he goes to he
endorsed Obama so he endorsed Obama
Obama says CIA director the Senate says
he can't possibly get confirmed so Obama
makes him the deputy National Security
adviser for counterterrorism okay which
does not require Senate confirmation
okay he almost immediately asks Eric
Holder the Attorney General to secretly
reopen the case against me now why did
he want to do that because we hated each
other that's it he just didn't like it I
aired the cia's dirty laundry and John
always had a nixonian obsession with
leaks unless it was him leaking in which
case you know there's a parade of
journalist from The Washington Post the
New York Times you know coming in and
out of his
office so they reopen the case yeah now
this is where cuz like I looked at the
Wikipedia before this on the case part
specifically cuz wanted to see like what
the what the narrative is alessie can
you actually pull that up just pull up
John's Wikipedia I I've never so looked
at my you never looked at your never
even occurred to me yeah let's let's
pull it up but basically what it says is
that the charges that ended up I think
the final ones that stuck when you made
the deal go down to the case alessie go
way down more uh more okay all right uh
go up go up yeah yeah want this yes
right here so this I I'll read it
straight off here the specific charges
were that in 2008 kiraku confirmed the
name of a CIA officer which was already
well known to people in the human rights
Community according to the government
accountability project to someone who
claimed to be writing a book about the
agency's rendition practices in a
separate 2008 incident kiraku gave a New
York Times journalist the business card
of a CIA agent who worked for quote a
private government contractor known for
its involvement in torture was that Duce
Martinez de Martinez who was never
undercover in his life okay so
essentially what they're what they're
saying is the final charges here didn't
have to do with your ABC interview or
anything like that it had to do with an
email you sent three of them did but
they dropped those they had to CU you
didn't do anything wrong no right but
the ones that eventually stuck were from
emails afterwards where there was
someone that you like confirmed yeah
I'll tell you the whole story please so
there was a journalist uh uh H was his
name New York Times guy no no it was um
ABC News it was Matthew Cole oh yeah who
was the other
guy I talked to
uh what the hell New York Times
name oh Scott Shane oh yeah is that it
yeah they charged me with Espionage for
talking to Scott Shane I like having
lunch with the New York Times is not
Espionage and they dropped the charges
interesting yeah okay so see what they
do is they they charge stack against you
so that they wear you down um so he
wrote me this email and he said hey I'm
doing a book on the Abu Omar rendition I
said I don't know anything about Abu
Omar and um he said well can you
introduce me to any of these dozen
people and I said I don't know any of
these people and I said look kidnapping
was not my thing at the agency I never I
never worked with those guys so he sends
me another email with a list of 12
people and he says can you introduce me
to any of these people I said clearly
you know this issue better than I do all
I know about the am Abu Omar rendition
was what I read in the Washington Post
and then he says what about on page
whatever 165 of your book you talk about
a guy I think his name is John I said oh
that's John Doe I don't know what ever
happened to him he he's probably retired
and living in Virginia that was the
crime I confirmed the last name of a
former
colleague do you think that's a crime
absolutely not first of all I had no
Criminal Intent secondly the name was
never made public and that's why I say
John Doe because the name was never made
public and then you look at David
Petraeus for example who released the
names of 10 covert operatives to his
girlfriend never charged you look at
Leon Panetta who outed the the Osama Bin
Laden shooter uh to uh Hollywood writer
Mark bu and Hollywood producer Katherine
Bigalow never charged with a crime and
there was a CIA disgruntled former CIA
officer in Maryland who put on his
website the name the names of seven
former CIA undercover people never
charged with a
crime so why charge this when there's no
Criminal Intent and the name was never
made public how' you did did you know
you were under investigation again no no
idea was a secret so the doors get the
doors get HD on you one day yeah there
were two things that happened um one in
Discovery we got we got 15 20,000 pages
of of Discovery classified Discovery and
we find this Memo from from Brennan to
holder and it says charge him with
Espionage and then holder writes back
and says my people don't think he
committed Espionage and then Brennan
writes back and says charge him anyway
and make him defend himself this is in
Discovery you have this yeah my God so
we went back and we said we said it's
targeted
prosecution because they don't like my
my political views um maybe it's like
late and because we've been talking for
six and a half hours and my mind's not
thinking straight but like the justice
department is it's not supposed to take
outside not ideas from someone else in
government it's supposed to act
independent right that's exactly right
but there was another thing that
happened when I was uh working for
Carrie one of the things that I
absolutely loved about that job and it's
what I loved about working
overseas um is you get to have lunch or
dinner with foreign diplomats and I just
love the the exchange of ideas you know
what do you guys think about the Israeli
elections what do you guys think about
the peace process what do you think
about you know eran's new policy toward
the Kurds whatever I love it yeah and I
get a call one day from the Japanese
Embassy from the number three at the
Japanese Embassy calls me he says he'd
love to have lunch I said great so we
meet up at uh at this Steakhouse on
Capitol Hill and um his English was so
bad that we did the whole lunch in
Arabic so he's their Middle East guy and
I remember what we talked about that day
at lunch this was in 2011
[Music]
we talked about the Middle East peace
process Israeli elections and Turkish
elections and at the end of it end of
the lunch he says to me so what's next
for you and I said well I I promised
Senator kriy that I'd give him two years
it's been two and a half I have five
kids I need to think about putting my
kids through college I think I'm going
to resign and go into the private sector
again and he goes no don't do that if
you give me information I can give you
money and I
said do you have any idea how many times
I've made that pitch shame on you cold
pitching me like that I said I'm going
to report this and I got up and I walked
out and I went directly without stopping
to the office of the Senate security
officer and I said I was just pitched by
a foreign intelligence officer he goes
was it that damn Russian again and I
said no Japanese he goes Japanese I said
I know right he said but you know they
do poke around for trade information
every once in a while he goes I have a
standalone computer it's not connected
to anything write it up I'm going to
print it and I'm going to take it to the
FBI I said great I wrote the entire
story of the lunch next day he calls me
he says two FBI agents are going to come
up and see you so come down to the skiff
the secure conference room and uh and
you can talk to them so I go down there
two young guys told them the whole story
and one of them says okay here's what we
want you to do we want you to call him
back invite him to lunch and try to get
him to tell you exactly what information
he wants and how much he's willing to
pay for it I said okay because I'm a
[__] Patriot I said you want me to
wear a wire they said no we're going to
be at the next table we're going to
listen to the whole conversation I said
okay so the morning of the lunch they
called and said something came up go
ahead and do it and write us another
memo so I did got all the information
they wanted wrote it up send it back
over they asked me to do it a third time
and a fourth time and a fifth time which
I did at the last lunch was a nice place
in Georgetown he says to me I just got
my dream job I'm going to be the number
two at the Japanese Embassy in Cairo and
it was so great knowing you I said great
good luck shook hands never saw again
year later I've been arrested we get all
this discovery oh my God he was an agent
there never was any Japanese Diplomat he
was an FBI agent who happened to be
Asian and spoke
Arabic
and I continually foiled their operation
because I would write every single
detail in these memos and send them back
to the FBI they must have been like God
damn this guy's good well finally one of
them wrote a note and he said it's clear
he's not going to take the the the bait
we should end this
operation and then that's when the guy
said ah I got transferred to Cairo I'm
like oh good
luck so I said to my lawyer why would
they do this I'm a patriot he said
they're they did it because they have a
[__] case and they know it's [__] and
that's why we're going to
trial but you didn't go to trial didn't
go to trial now what went what went into
that I was fully completely prepared to
go to trial and and by the way you found
out like literally when you were
arrested that that that there was even
an investigation against you within
weeks yeah oh yeah when the day of my
arrest was the day you found out I found
out oh my God they've been they've been
following me for three years got it okay
tap my phones grabb my emails teams of
surveillance following us to Church into
into church into Target restaurants kids
school all kinds of [__] what' your wife
say about all this oh she was furious at
them not at me she was very
supportive you know my my aunt died
um I got arrested on a Tuesday my aunt
died on the previous Tuesday and on
Friday was the funeral it was in
Ohio so I got in the car drove to Ohio
and and I thought you know what I'm
gonna go to my grandparents old house so
my grandparents lived in this
neighborhood that it's really like not
good it's not safe so it's in the hood I
I drove up and I just parked in front of
it there was a car behind me and I I
parked and I pulled over and stopped and
the guy's like behind me so I rolled out
my window and I I went like this like go
around me
and he's just like waiting there I'm
thinking what the [__] is this so I go
up to the intersection and I make a
really broad illegal U-turn in the
intersection and he does too I'm like
okay I'm under surveillance in waren
Ohio of all
places so I thought this is weird it's
probably my first wife cuz we're going
to court soon on some custody issue and
she's probably hired some pi see what
I'm doing this is the Friday before the
Tuesday that you're going to be arrested
correct so I drive to the cemetery I'm
going to go visit my grandparents my
aunts and uncles I got a cousin there he
follows me into the
cemetery so I park he Parks kind of I
don't know 40 feet away so I start
walking over the car to say what the
[__] and he takes off so I called my
wife and I said this is going to sound
like I'm nuts but I'm under surveillance
she's like what and I told her the whole
thing she's still in CIA
yeah to make a long story short they
thought we learned in Discovery they
thought someone had tipped me off and I
was running to
Canada I got on the highway with no word
to anybody with a suitcase and I hit the
Pennsylvania tur bike and I'm going
toward Canada so they had guys from the
Cleveland field office and the
Cincinnati field office and the
Pittsburgh field office and they're all
converging on Warren Ohio cuz rather
than go to my aunt's funeral they think
I'm running to Canada oh my God [__]
morons Jesus so then you get the doors
kicked in and your wife's supportive
yeah very wasn't wasn't she later not
though I am not able to talk about that
oh due to pending
litigation okay we'll leave that one
there so you so throughout 2012 you're
getting all this discovery you're
meeting with your legal team you said as
you explained they stack charges and
everything you're like you're going to
beat these [__] but eventually
two of the charges are something you
plea to late in the year one one they
charged me with making a false statement
and we were never really clear as to
what the false statement was supposed to
be and they ended up dropping that too
so I got this one charge that's hanging
over me and in the beginning the
government when they first arrested me
um we had a profer meeting and they said
um take a plea to an Espionage charge
you do 45 years and I said I am not
doing 45
minutes and this [__] [__] who is
now like the deputy attorney general for
a Criminal Division she says to me take
the plea and you might live to meet your
grandchildren Mr
kiraku yeah nice so
45 I ignored them and then like 6 months
later later they said all right take a
plea to an Espionage charge and he does
10 and I'm like I didn't commit
Espionage having lunch with the New York
Times is not Espionage that's
right so that was on a Monday on
Wednesday they came back eight years I
said forget it they said on Friday five
years and my lead lawyer was uh Plato
cacheris absolutely legendary figure in
White Collar defense in Washington he
represented the most important people of
the second half of the 20th
century including Attorneys General you
know President Nixon Monica Lewinsky who
yeah so he probably cost a pretty penny
tell me about it I still owe him he's
dead I still owe him $1.1
million I won't collect for him don't
worry
so he said to me you know I've been a
lawyer here for 52 years
and this is the first time I've ever
seen them come down in time he said
usually they'll offer you 10 and if you
say no the next offer is 15 then the
next offer is 20 I said why are they
coming down in time he said there's no
case
here I said okay I'll take
that then they come back in October of
2012 and they offer three and
A2 three and a half from 40 five is a
pretty big difference yeah and I said no
I'm not going to do it I haven't done
anything wrong I'm not going to take it
somebody's got to stand up to these
people
so then they came back and they said
best and final offer two and a half you
do 23
months I have 24 hours to to uh make a
decision so that night my wife and I
stayed up all night long
and I was the first person that's ever
been charged with this crime other than
a spy an actual spy who was charged when
it was first written and I have a letter
from the guy who wrote the law saying I
should never have been charged and my
congressman says I never should have
been charged and I got a page full of
Judges who say I should never been
charged so I decided I'm going to fight
this thing this law is unconstitutional
I'm going to fight it so at 6:00 a.m. I
emailed the lawyers there were 11 of
them
yeah and I said been up all night did
all the research I'm going to
trial so one of them emails me back and
he says put on a pot of coffee we're on
our way over so three of them the the
three the four the four senior most
lawyers came over to the house and Plato
who's been a lawyer for 52 years and his
brother is the chief judge in the court
that's Prosecuting me
um he said his exact words you stupid
son of a [__] take the deal I said
you're the one who told me not to take
the deal you're the one who said they
have a [__] case and they know it's [__]
and we're going to
trial and then the second lawyer Bob
Trout who is just an awesome human being
all all four of these guys amazing human
beings I refer business to them
constantly so yeah they could cut the
[__] bill a little bit I know well no
they did they forgave it okay they're
they're they're great guys so Bob Trout
who Bob Trout is sort of an elegant
Southern gentleman and he says John if
you were my own brother I would beg you
to take the deal and then the attorney
who I actually liked and connected with
the most Mark McDougall who was the
chief of White Collar defense at Ain
Gump and Strauss the fourth largest Law
Firm on the planet Earth
mhm he says to me got right in my face
and he says you know what your problem
is your problem is you think this is
about Justice and it's not about Justice
it's about mitigating damage take the
deal and I said if I don't take the deal
and I'm convicted what am I
realistically looking at and he said 12
to 18
years I got five kids at
home so and then I'm thinking about it
I'm thinking and thinking I'm standing
there and Mark
says this can be be a blip in your life
or it can be the defining event of your
life make it the
blip great sale and so I I took the
deal did you feel you took the
deal for those reasons and also for your
family as you lay out and that's the
most important thing but as a as a
person who knew you didn't do anything
wrong and believe that the United States
is supposed to be The Shining beacon on
a hill did that
shatter some of your understanding of or
what you thought your understanding of
what this country was about well to me
the Constitution is the Constitution the
Constitution didn't change with what
happened to me but I I realized you know
what ugly hard ball politics looks like
um in my in my views those people who
trumped up these charges who testified
against me before the grand jury you
know the likes of of Jose Rodriguez For
example and a whole host of others oh
they testified yeah sure there's a whole
a laundry list oh yeah you don't you
don't get the uh the transcript of the
testimony but you get the list of names
um These Guys these guys are going to go
down in history
as as the monsters that they were in in
real life I say this all the time sorry
that's okay you're good good I say this
all the time one of the reasons why
these guys continue to double down and
triple down on things like the torture
program or on the John kiraku situation
is that when they
die torture is going to be the
centerpiece of their
obituaries
and they need to try to salvage what's
left of their
legacies but the truth is they're on the
wrong side of
History right I'm on the right side I'm
confident of that and so I'm proud of
what I did I wear it on my
sleeve I have nothing to be ashamed of
you know there's this joke that ah
everybody in prison's innocent you'd be
surprised actually it's a bigger number
than you think oh boy is it we have 5%
of the world's population and 25% of the
world's prison population yeah my my
friend Raj rajaratnam who was in here
who's a billionaire who had a wild story
of being attacked in the southern
district in New York and oh as a
billionaire he's not the guy that you
would think is like the sympathetic
figure but when you really go through
the story it's it's pretty crazy what
they did to him and I reviewed it inside
and out and and I I believe him and I I
I agree with him but you know he he
talked about when he was in there you
know this is one of the top five
investors to ever live he's a very smart
guy I think he said it's something like
25% of people in prison are at least
partially innocent absolutely and 10%
are completely innocent said a lot of
that 25 almost all that 25% is they were
they were railed by the system and
forced to take a [__] deal or they had
horrible
representation they got very common yes
you know there are two strategies that
the that the justice department uses one
I mentioned a second ago it's called
charge tacking so they'll charge you
with five 10 20 felonies they'll wait
until you go bankrupt yep and then
they'll come back and say we'll drop all
the charges but one if you take a guilty
plea yeah what do you do I mean you you
risk dying in prison but you still get a
felony on your record you still got to
give up Freedom tell I I lost my freedom
I lost my right to vote and I lost my
federal pension and I lost the right to
own a gun so the governor of Virginia I
didn't even apply for a estate a state
pardon the governor of Virginia Terry
mccauliff pardoned me on his own valtion
I got this big certificate in the mail
one day 20 we were back in the new house
so
2016 good fall of 2016 I sent him a
letter thanking him like it just came a
courier brought it this big certificate
with a gold seal in the governor's
signature it says pardon at the top but
you had federal charges so is that just
symbolic it was symbolic so it gave me
my right to vote that's cool and it gave
me my state right to own a gun but I
don't dare because there's a federal
mandatory minimum of eight years fell in
with a gun so I I never you you know I
got to get a federal pardon for that
presidential pardon that's crazy yeah
but you go and and there's some stuff
you can't talk about it from after but
you go you do this and now here you are
like it's getting late you were we we
had a long story today with you and the
train and then coming up here so I
appreciate you my own fault theate all
good all good but we've been talking for
so long I don't want to keep you here
too much longer so I think another time
we can talk about you know what happened
in prison and all that and then really
get into what you've done afterwards cuz
now you know you're a guy you got a
substack you are you are using all the
skills you've used from your career to
provide analysis to people in addition
to helping out with some of your own
interests here as far as you know
Criminal Justice Reform and and
reforming some of the bureaucracy and
things like that you know people joke my
my my ex now my exwife but she she used
to joke
that if they thought they were going to
silence you man they didn't know you at
all yeah that's clear they've made me
famous yeah you know you know Roger
Waters from Pink Floyd do I know Roger
come on Roger paid off my second
mortgage really when I got arrested
uhhuh to save my house for my wife and
kids oh that's amazing I had never met
Roger Waters and he just he followed my
case and he's like somebody's got to
help this guy and he paid off my second
mortgage that's pretty cool it Roseanne
Bar sent me five grand to give to my
lawyers Yoko Ono another one would call
me are you okay are you feeling okay
you're not going to do anything crazy
right seriously wow you'd be surprised I
got you you've turned a lot of lemons
into lemonade with this for sure yeah
I've embraced it again I gota I got to
credit my ex-wife you know in the in the
days after my um after my arrest I was I
was like actively considering doing
something terrible to
myself and she said
listen they have consistently
underestimated your strength
consistently you're far tougher than
they think you are and she said they're
going to change their focus to someone
else which they did it was Ed Snowden
and she said you have to embrace this
and you have to keep talking about it
because your side of the story is going
to become the side of record and she was
exactly right that's great advice mhm I
think I think you've done a great job of
that and you got to keep doing it you
know and I hope you get an opportunity
to go on some other huge podcasts as far
yeah thank you for this of course was
fun of course of course it's we're gonna
have to do a lot more because you know I
I've loved your podcast with Danny where
you're just breaking down all the issues
and everything because you know so much
about this stuff love it so you're right
down the road in DC we'll definitely do
that but we're going to have your
substack Link in there we'll also have
the link to some of your books and then
anything else got a TV show now that
people might be interested in what's a
TV show it's called CIA
Declassified it is we look at
Declassified CIA documents and we use
those documents to tell uh stories about
historic events and it's on unified uh
television it's online and we'll put a
little QR code so you can see it love it
all right John thank you so much man
we'll get you back home and we'll do
this again sometime looking forward to
it all right everybody else you know
what it is give it a thought get back to
me peace thank you guys for watching the
episode before you leave please be sure
to hit that subscribe button and smash
that like button on the video it's a
huge help and also if you're over on
Instagram be sure to follow the show at
Julian Dory podcast or also on my
personal page at Julian D Dory both
links are in the description below
finally if you'd like to catch up on our
latest episodes use the Julian Dory
podcast playlist Link in the description
below thank you